Thank you, Chairman Brown, Ranking Member 
Scott, distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank you for 
inviting me to testify today on our ongoing efforts to deny the 
People's Republic of China access to restricted U.S. 
technologies.
    As the Assistant Secretary for Export Enforcement at the 
Department of Commerce, I oversee a team of law enforcement 
agents and analysts who carry out a critical national security 
mission: keeping our country's most sensitive technologies out 
of the world's most dangerous hands.
    At no point in history has this mission been more 
important, especially when it comes to the PRC. As our 
intelligence community's most recent annual threat assessment 
notes, ``China has the capability to directly attempt to alter 
the rules-based global order in every realm and across multiple 
regions as a near-peer competitor that is increasingly pushing 
to change global norms and potentially threatening its 
neighbors.''
    Here is what my team has been doing to meet this 
unprecedented moment. First, we have enhanced our enforcement 
policies; second, we have expanded our partnerships at home and 
abroad; and third, we have taken aggressive enforcement actions 
to impose real costs on those who seek to violate our rules and 
undermine U.S. national security, both in China and elsewhere.
    On enforcement policies, we have updated them to ensure 
that our finite resources are best positioned to have maximum 
national security impact. Last June, for example, we announced 
that we are raising penalties for more serious violations, 
prioritizing the most serious cases, and eliminating no-admit, 
no-deny settlements. We also made our administrative charging 
letters public when filed, so now as soon as we allege someone 
has violated our rules, everybody knows it.
    In October, we issued a policy announcing that when a 
foreign Government fails to schedule our end-use checks in a 
timely way, we generally seek to move the unchecked parties 
onto our Unverified List, and then, from the Unverified List to 
the Entity List. Prior to this policy, the Chinese Government 
had not scheduled a single end-use check for us in over 2 
years. In the 7 months since the policy was issued, we have 
completed over 90.
    Next, partnerships. Given the scope of the threat we face 
in protecting U.S. technology from misappropriation by the PRC 
Government and others, we know we must amplify our efforts 
through robust partnerships. It is why we joined with the 
Department of Justice, the FBI, and Homeland Security 
Investigations to form the Disruptive Technology Strike Force, 
which works to protect advanced U.S. technologies from being 
illicitly acquired by Nation-State actors such as China, 
Russia, and Iran.
    We also have developed close partnerships with industry, 
academia, through our Academic Outreach Initiative, the 
intelligence community and Treasury components like OFAC and 
FinCEN. In the past year we have put out multiple joint alerts 
and advisories with these partnerships designed to educate 
industry and academic on how best to comply with our rules and 
detect violations of them.
    We also partner closely with our international 
counterparts, bilaterally, multilaterally, and through our end-
use check program. We are working with the G7, the EU, and our 
Five Eyes allies to create an enforcement coordination 
mechanism that will help us work more closely together to 
combat export control evasion.
    And finally, our enforcement actions. Just 2 weeks ago, 
alongside DOJ, FBI, and HSI, we announced the first wave of 
Strike Force actions, including charges in five different cases 
across the country, three of which touched the PRC. In two 
California cases, the defendants are charged with stealing 
sensitive American technology and shipping it to restricted 
Chinese entities. In a third case, from Manhattan, the 
defendant is alleged to have used a sanctioned Chinese entity 
as a front company to aid Iranian ballistic missile 
procurement.
    And last month we announced a $300 million penalty against 
Seagate Technology for selling missions of hard disk drives to 
Huawei, even after Seagate's only two competitors have stopped 
selling due to our Foreign Direct Product Rule. It is the 
largest standalone administrative penalty in our history, and 
it sends a clear message about the need for companies to comply 
with our rules and about the power of our administrative 
enforcement tools when they do not.
    In conclusion, as Beijing seeks to spread its technology-
driven authoritarianism the world over, our export enforcement 
team remains hyper-focused on preventing the PRC from illegally 
obtaining sensitive U.S. items.
    Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today about 
our work, and I look forward to your questions.
