Thank you, Chairman Sullivan, Ranking Member 
Markey, and Members of the Subcommittee.
    Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to testify.
    We are at a historic crossroads in the U.S.-China 
relationship and the steps we take now will chart the course of 
U.S. economic and technological leadership for decades to come.
    In 2017, the U.S. began for the first time to confront 
head-on the challenges posed by China's predatory practices. 
Those practices had been ignored for decades and as a result 
the United States lost capabilities in sector after sector in 
manufacturing and technology that are so critical to this 
Nation's security.
    In order to understand the PRC's predatory economic 
strategy, it's important to understand the specific tactics or 
tools that it deploys. Indeed, China's most effective tools by 
design are those that are governed by weak or non-existent 
international rules and disciplines.
    Case in point, the PRC takes advantage of the absence of 
international rules over state-owned enterprises to funnel 
massive amounts of resources to SOEs with the intent of 
dominating strategic sectors worldwide.
    The government also distorts prices and costs throughout 
its economy to distort land and property, energy, wages, and 
raw material prices in order to export under-valued goods and 
services worldwide.
    The goal is to under-price competitors to force them out of 
the market. The goal is to hollow out our industries.
    Next, the PRC Government takes advantage of the dearth of 
rules governing global overcapacity to flood world markets with 
goods at uncompetitive prices. This has been its strategy in 
steel, aluminum, chemicals, and optical fiber cables--the 
infrastructure for 5G.
    I fear critical industries, like semi-conductors in many 
parts of the China 2025 Plans, will be targets next.
    The PRC is further exploiting opportunities abroad to 
monopolize strategic assets. For example, the PRC's increasing 
control of the raw materials necessary for high-tech products 
by purchasing mines abroad, cobalt, graphite, lithium, nickel, 
and platinum, to name a few.
    The impacted countries are the United States and our allies 
and because these critical materials are finite assets that 
cannot be replaced, China is able to exert influence over the 
rest of the world by withholding access to them.
    Next, as we know the PRC regularly supports and directs the 
theft and misappropriation of U.S. intellectual property. This 
is well understood, but what's less discussed is this. Even 
when Chinese firms are perceived to collaborate in 
technological development, take, for example, Huawei's 
announcement that it's planning to build in the U.K. a $1.2 
billion optical fiber cable research facility, the gains are 
only one-sided.
    Chinese companies will benefit from collaboration with 
international scientists abroad and then repatriate the 
technology to China to generate overcapacity to eliminate 
competition and obtain a monopoly position.
    In sectors like 5G where optical cables provide the 
infrastructure, the national security implications are obvious.
    China's engagement in international standards as a way to 
influence global technology market is also of great concern.
    Finally, it's worth emphasizing that because China is a 
sovereign state, foreign laws can never be sufficient to fully 
address its conduct. It is not an actor that has shown a great 
interest in adhering to international laws at all.
    Of course, the past policies of the U.S. have failed to 
prevent China's rise as a predatory economic actor. To build 
our seemingly efficient supply chains, we flocked to China as a 
low-cost producer and traded our most sensitive intellectual 
property in exchange for short-term market access and profits. 
As a result, we willingly transferred our debt and exported our 
manufacturing capabilities and jobs to a non-market economy 
where market principles and transparency do not exist.
    By doing this, we created a global economy where distorted 
prices and non-market conditions are allowed to proliferate 
rather than market-based ones.
    By understanding what has led to the erosion of our supply 
chains, then it stands to reason that a comprehensive reshoring 
strategy must remedy those causes.
    At the outset, the United States must systematically 
identify all items that are critical to our national security 
to assess our dependency on imports. This Administration, my 
office in particular, on behalf of the White House, has begun 
to do this. We need to continue to do this on a permanent 
basis.
    A second essential component is incentivizing inward 
investments in domestic R&D and manufacturing capabilities. 
We've begun doing this through tax cuts to boost innovation and 
economic growth. Let's do more.
    Third, U.S. Government procurement authority. This is 
critical to providing capital to new American investments and 
to generate immediate demand for those new production 
operations. This will compel companies to take a leap of faith 
and reinvest in the United States.
    And it is, of course, axiomatic that for U.S. investments 
to grow, we must have a strategy to fight back against 
predatory import competition, low-cost imports that aim to 
undercut U.S. production and growth.
    These foregoing elements are essential to a comprehensive 
reshoring strategy. It will require a whole of government 
approach, but I can tell you as a trade lawyer and an 
economist, they will be effective in rebuilding supply chains 
that are robust and are resilient.
    I'd like to conclude by emphasizing that the global economy 
of the 20th Century was developed by the United States and 
although China is aggressively seeking to shape the global 
economic order of the 21st Century, it is not too late to act.
    Our supply chain vulnerabilities are too great to await yet 
another national security crisis that may expose this country 
to even more peril.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Nikakhtar follows:]

    Prepared Statement of Hon. Nazak Nikakhtar, Assistant Secretary,
        International Trade Administration, Industry & Analysis,
                      U.S. Department of Commerce
    Good morning. Chairman Sullivan, Ranking Member Markey, and Members 
of the Subcommittee, thank you for providing me the opportunity to 
testify today regarding the United States' economic relationship with 
the People's Republic of China (PRC). We are at historic cross-roads in 
the U.S.-China relationship, as the steps we take now will chart the 
course for U.S. economic and technological leadership, and will shape 
the landscape for the democratic world for decades, and possibly 
centuries to come.
    The Department of Commerce's International Trade Administration is 
responsible for strengthening the competitiveness of U.S. industry in 
the United States and global marketplace, increasing investments in 
America, monitoring compliance with U.S. trade agreements, and 
enforcing U.S. trade laws. At Industry and Analysis (I&A), we are, in 
particular, responsible for working with businesses to develop 
international trade and investment strategies for a range of industries 
from the manufacturing sector to the financial services sector, 
including industries that are critical to the United States' national 
security interests. I&A also leads the Commerce Department's 
participation in the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United 
States (CFIUS), a committee that reviews certain specific foreign 
investments and real estate transactions in the United States for their 
impact on U.S. national security.
    Today, I would like to speak about challenges to the United States' 
national security industries and set the stage for the successful 
commercial growth of our most critical sectors. In 2017, the U.S. 
Government began, for the first time, to confront head-on the 
challenges posed by China's predatory practices. Those challenges had 
been ignored for decades and, as a result, over the course of the past 
40-plus years, the United States has continuously lost capabilities in 
sector after sector in manufacturing, technology, and services that are 
essential to our national security. In goods alone, the offshoring of 
manufacturing has created supply chain vulnerabilities across hundreds 
of critical products, ranging from semiconductor and electronics 
manufacturing to the development of active pharmaceutical ingredients. 
This has led to job losses of between 3.4 to 3.7 million between 2001 
to 2018.\1\ In key sectors such as communications equipment, 
electronics and computer technology, we ceded up to 40 percent of the 
domestic market share to Chinese imports, and globally China has 
captured 40 percent of market share in those sectors as well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Scott, Robert; Mokhiber, Zane, Economic Policy Institute, 
``Growing China Trade Deficit Cost 3.7 Million American Jobs Between 
2001 and 2018,'' (Jan. 30, 2020) https://www.epi.org/publication/
growing-china-trade-deficits-costs-us-jobs/; also Census Data and 
Department of Commerce calculations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    To underscore with examples of where that leaves us, the United 
States does not have the domestic supply chains required to manufacture 
many key electronic components for our telecommunications systems, or 
many active pharmaceutical ingredients for medicines to serve America's 
health needs. Nor does the United States process the rare earth 
elements that produce magnets that are essential for military and 
weapons uses, as processing is now dominated by China. Even the more 
mature steel and aluminum industries have been experiencing existential 
challenges, as global overcapacity continues to weaken American firms. 
Where the United States was once the undisputed leader in technological 
innovation and industrial advancements across the board, it is now 
struggling to remain competitive in many key industries.
    There are two classes of state actors in the global economy. The 
first class is comprised of nations that generally adhere to their 
obligations under the rules and principles of the global economic and 
trading system, as enshrined in international organizations such as the 
United Nations, International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, and the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
The second class is comprised of nations that either do not adhere (or 
selectively adhere) to these rules and norms, or actively circumvent 
them. While both classes of nations can introduce distortions into the 
global economic order--for example, through corporate subsidies and 
discriminatory nontariff barriers--the distortions can be managed when 
dealing with rules-based state actors and market-oriented economies. 
Here, international agreements may provide viable legal mechanisms to 
address non-competitive, market-distorting behavior, and states have 
historically adhered to their binding commitments or improved their 
practices when compliance fell short.
    The Chinese Communist Party (CCP), on the other hand, does not just 
fall within this second class of state actors. It is also, by far, the 
most distortive economic actor that the global trading system has ever 
encountered. Not only are the current rules of international trade and 
monetary policy largely ineffective when dealing with China but, as a 
non-market economy under the tight control of the CCP, the government 
of the People's Republic of China flagrantly flouts those rules when it 
believes it is in its interest to do so, and shows no intention of 
reforming to a market-based system or adhering to its international 
obligations when those rules frustrate its national industrial goals. 
And because of China's size and scale, it has been able to weaken 
international supply chains and disrupt the global economy 
significantly. In this respect, the threat from China is formidable, 
and it is the largest threat the United States has encountered to date.
    But we need to remember that this threat is nothing new, it has its 
roots in the Cold War. Khrushchev famously said ``We,'' meaning the 
Sino-Soviet bloc, ``declare war upon you,'' the United States, ``in the 
peaceful world of trade. We will declare a war; we will win over the 
United States.'' Again, quoting from the Prime Minister of the Soviet 
Union, ``We,'' again referring to the Communist states, ``value trade 
less for economic reasons and most for political reasons.'' The hearing 
transcript for the Trade Act of 1962 includes these powerful 
statements. Perhaps in response to this threat, in the ``Statement and 
Purpose'' subsection of the Trade Act of 1962, 19 U.S.C. 1801, Congress 
explicitly enacted into law the goal of Chapter 19; it is inter alia, 
``through trade agreements affording mutual trade benefits'' to 
``prevent Communist economic penetration.'' This provision is still 
valid today precisely because the threats continue today. And after 
1979, when the United States formally normalized trade relations with 
China, the PRC government accelerated its plan to augment global 
economic and military strength in a quest that it concedes will 
ultimately lead to a great power struggle against the United States.
    The PRC government's weapon of choice is predatory economic 
tactics, and it has successfully used such tactics to disrupt global 
supply chains and weaken the technological advancements of the United 
States and its Western allies. China has transformed itself into the 
epicenter of global commerce, has centralized manufacturing and 
research and development (R&D) hubs within its own borders and, with 
this, it has accumulated the power to influence all economies that are 
dependent on it.
CHINA'S USE OF PREDATORY ECONOMIC TACTICS TO CAPTURE 
        CRITICAL SUPPLY CHAINS AND TECHNOLOGY
    In order to understand the PRC government's predatory economic 
strategy, it is important to understand the specific trade tools that 
it deploys. Indeed, China's most effective tools, by design, are those 
that are governed by weak or non-existent international rules and 
disciplines. To understand a ``strategic competitor'' or an 
``adversary,'' one has to understand their tactics. To counter those 
tactics, we need to consider how our laws need to be strengthened.
    Case in point: China's economy has grown in large part because of 
the massive subsidies it provides to industries, and the lack of 
transparency on the subsidies it provides results from its failure to 
notify them completely to the WTO, as well as the absence of effective 
WTO rules governing the types of market-distorting industrial subsidies 
used in China.\2\ It is difficult to legally challenge what we do not 
know about or what the rules do not cover. Moreover, China leverages 
its self-designated developing country status to avoid complying with 
existing WTO rules and obligations, and WTO rules are generally silent 
on how a member state can challenge another country's self-designated 
status.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Examples include Chinese government subsidies that constitute 
unlimited guarantees to corporations, subsidies to insolvent or ailing 
enterprises lacking credible restructuring plans (also known as 
``zombie'' companies), subsidies that encourage global overcapacity, 
subsidies to firms unable to obtain long-term financing from 
independent commercial sources that are operating in sectors or 
industries in overcapacity, and direct debt forgiveness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Next, the PRC government takes advantage of the absence of 
applicable international rules over state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to 
funnel massive amounts of capital and other resources to SOEs with the 
well-publicized intent of dominating strategic sectors worldwide. The 
PRC government also distorts prices and costs throughout its economy 
(e.g., land and property, energy, wages, and raw materials) through 
direct price controls and to export undervalued goods and services 
worldwide, thereby weakening the competitive positions of market-based 
firms. Dangling possible access to China's large consumer market and 
making available cheap labor, goods and services are also how China 
lures foreign manufacturing capacity and technological know-how into 
its own borders. And as the CCP controls the government of a sovereign 
state, it knows full well that its non-market economic system is 
unaffected by legal challenges or the prospect thereof by the rest of 
the world; even possible losses of legal challenges at the WTO may not 
be incentive enough to compel China to reform a system that has served 
it so well and eroded the competitive positions of its adversaries so 
quickly.
    Just as alarming, the PRC government takes advantage of the dearth 
of rules governing global overcapacity to flood world markets with 
distortedly low-priced goods. In 2019, China's overcapacity 
significantly depressed global prices in the fiber optical cable 
market. Its strategy is to eliminate competitors and obtain absolute 
control over this critical 5G infrastructure asset. The PRC government 
has previously deployed the same strategy in the steel and aluminum 
sectors, among many others, and the same strategy will create excess 
capacity in new sectors in the future. And notwithstanding the fact 
that the 2020 coronavirus pandemic has dramatically reduced demand for 
steel and aluminum products worldwide, China has once again ramped up 
steel and aluminum production and dramatically increased inventories, 
contributing to drastic global price depression. This illustrates the 
national security threat to our steel and aluminum industries and why 
the President imposed Section 232 tariffs to address the impact of 
overcapacity and the threat posed by steel and aluminum imports. 
Outside the United States, however, the global surge continues and 
China's actions are still destabilizing the global steel and aluminum 
industries.
    The PRC government is further exploiting opportunities abroad to 
monopolize strategic ports and mines (among other assets). State-backed 
Chinese investors own 10 percent or more of equity in ports in Europe, 
and it has major deals in Greece, Italy, Spain, France, the 
Netherlands, and Belgium. This is in addition to a growing number of 
investments in more than 40 ports in North America, South America, 
Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Central Asia, South and 
Southeast Asia, Australia, and the Pacific. The PRC government is 
similarly increasing control of the raw materials necessary for 
manufacturing high-technology products (e.g., phones, vehicles, 
advanced energy storage systems, and magnets) that are sourced from a 
small number of countries, and for which substitutes are unavailable. 
Operating in niche markets with limited transparency, often in 
politically unstable countries, Chinese firms continue to capture 
supplies of cobalt, graphite, lithium, nickel, niobium, and platinum, 
to name just a few. Because these minerals and metals are finite assets 
that cannot be replaced, China is able to exert influence over the rest 
of the world by withholding access to these assets to compel nations to 
bend to its will.
    Additionally, in its never-ending quest for technological 
superiority and control over key positions in the industrial value 
chain, the PRC government regularly has supported or directed the theft 
and misappropriation of U.S. technology and intellectual property (IP). 
Monetary damages accrued to the United States are estimated to range 
from $50 billion to as high as $600 billion annually. Moreover, by 
making short-lived market access promises to cutting-edge technology 
companies, the PRC government pressures the most technologically-
advanced firms to transfer IP and sensitive data to it. The PRC 
government ultimately uses the IP it extracts from companies to 
displace them from the market. China's increased dominance in key 
segments of the industrial value chain further cements its technology 
transfer approach. Even where Chinese firms are perceived to 
``collaborate'' in technology development, take for example Huawei's 
announcement that it plans to build a $1.2 billion optical fiber 
research facility in the United Kingdom, the gains are only one 
sided.\3\ Chinese companies will, as directed by the PRC government, 
benefit from scientific research and collaboration with international 
scientists abroad, resulting in some cases in the repatriation of 
technology to generate overcapacity to eliminate competition and obtain 
a monopoly position. In sectors like 5G, where optical fiber cables 
provide the infrastructure for an impending technology revolution, the 
national security implications are obvious.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Gold, Hadas, CNN, ``Huawei to Build $1.2 Billion Cambridge 
Facility as It Faces Uncertain UK Future,''(June 25, 2020) https://
www.cnn.com/2020/06/25/tech/huawei-cambridge-uk/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    It is also reported that the Chinese government, this year, is 
implementing a nationwide credit rating system for all corporations--
foreign-owned or Chinese-owned--operating within China. Companies 
handling sensitive personal data and proprietary technical information 
will be required to transfer that data to the Chinese government. The 
European Chamber reports this credit rating system as amounting to 
``life or death'' for companies.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ European Chamber of Commerce, ``European Chamber Report on 
China's Corporate Social Credit System, A Wake Up Call for European 
Businesses in China,'' (Aug. 28, 2019), https://
www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/press-releases/3045/
european_chamber_report_on_china_s
_corporate_social_credit_system_a_wake_up_call_for_european_business_in_
china.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    China's engagement in international standards as a way to influence 
the global technology market also is of great concern, but it is often 
not fully understood. To illustrate this attempted influence, take for 
instance the fact that, from 2011 to 2019, the number of Chinese-led 
technical committees in the International Organization for 
Standardization, one of the largest international standards setting 
organizations, increased by 75 percent.\5\ Further, China has 
strategically increased its participation in the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), an agency of the United Nations 
responsible for coordinating telecommunications operations and 
services, with the hopes of expanding its influence around the globe. 
In fact, in key technology working groups of the ITU, China alone 
comprises 40 percent of participants.\6\ Moreover, China's press into 
international standardization ranges from introducing weak proposals 
into the standards development process, flooding the organizations with 
low-quality proposals that detract from and take resources away from 
sound proposals, to making financial contributions as a way to wield 
power over those organizations and to punish member companies and 
countries that do not side with its agenda. Indeed, China's 
participation in international organizations has become a vehicle to 
advance its One Belt One Road Initiative, and the more influence China 
has over standards development, the more likely this initiative will 
succeed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Kamensky, Jack, China Business Review, ``China's Participation 
in International Standards Setting: Benefits and Concerns for U.S. 
Industry,'' (Feb. 7, 2020) https://www.chinabusiness
review.com/chinas-participation-in-international-standards-setting-
benefits-and-concerns-for-us-industry/.
    \6\ Department of Commerce calculations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Additionally, China uses other international organizations to 
advance its global ambition, including the Belt and Road Initiative. To 
illustrate, it has been reported that the head of the UN Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs used his position to discriminate against 
people and organizations who were drawing attention to the CCP's 
repression of the Uighur ethnic group. The World Health Organization's 
capture by the Chinese government, by failing to alert countries to the 
rapid transmission of the coronavirus, is yet another recent example. 
Even more to the point, if the Chinese government is currently 
threatening to retaliate against Nokia and Ericsson for the EU's 
possible move to ban Huawei from their 5G systems,\7\ imagine the types 
of influence that China could wield if it is able to dominate global 
standards organizations and the standards themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Lin, Liza; Woo, Stu; Wei, Lingling, ``China May Retaliate 
Against Nokia and Ericsson If EU Countries Move to Ban Huawei,'' Wall 
Street Journal (July 20, 2020), https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-may-
retaliate-against-nokia-and-ericsson-if-eu-countries-move-to-ban-
huawei-1159525
0557.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Finally, it is worth emphasizing that because China is a sovereign 
state, foreign laws can never be sufficient to fully address its 
conduct. In fact, the PRC government takes advantage of the United 
States' lack of an extradition treaty with it to advance cyberattacks 
on sensitive U.S. assets. The attacks not only obtain proprietary trade 
secrets from companies and sensitive personal information about 
American citizens from servers, but these attacks also target crucial 
weapons systems and sensitive military technology (well-documented 
examples include attacks that extracted sensitive information about 
U.S. submarines, cryptographic systems, the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, 
and anti-ship missiles that are crucial for deterrence and developing 
countermeasures). China's medium of cybertheft also includes stealing 
computer software source codes, design technology, and technical 
product specifications. And the PRC government continues to violate its 
2015 bilateral commitment to the United States in which it had vowed to 
refrain from stealing and misappropriating U.S. IP.
    The tactics used by the PRC government over the course of the past 
40 plus years have enabled the country to move its economy from the 
12th largest in the world ($191 billion gross domestic product, GDP 
(current prices), in 1980) to the second largest ($14 trillion GDP 
(current prices) in 2019); become the second largest foreign holder of 
U.S. debt at $1.09 trillion in 2019 (the first largest being Japan 
holding $1.27 trillion), and grow as the world's largest exporter of 
goods. Indeed, the United States' largest bilateral trade deficit is 
with China ($345.6 billion in deficit in goods in 2019). In addition, 
China today holds uniquely powerful positions in the most critical 
supply chains in the world including rare earths elements, medical 
equipment and supplies, pharmaceuticals, and electronics.
    The past policies of the United States did not effectively impede 
or curtail China's rise as a predatory economic actor. To build our 
seemingly efficient supply chains, we flocked to China as the low-cost 
producer of virtually every link in the chain, allowed the PRC 
government to build reserves of U.S. dollars which it used to devalue 
its currency, traded our most sensitive intellectual property in 
exchange for short-term market access and profits, and did not 
adequately use legal enforcement tools to protect our industries. Our 
motives were short-sighted, and we failed to sufficiently anticipate 
the vulnerabilities that this trading relationship would create.
    As a result, we willingly transferred our debt and exported our 
manufacturing capabilities (and jobs) to a non-market economy where 
market principles, transparency, and predictability do not exist. By 
doing this, we created a global economy where distorted prices and non-
market conditions are allowed to proliferate. We also put China in 
control of our revenue stream. This vulnerability is often not 
discussed among policymakers, but it is important to emphasize: within 
our highest-technology sectors, substantial revenue comes from U.S. 
exports to China. This means that China, by controlling America's 
revenue stream, also controls America's ability to earn income and fund 
R&D. This is an extraordinary vulnerability that, if unaddressed, will 
be used by the PRC government to further halt America's technological 
progress.
RESHORING CRITICAL SUPPLY CHAINS
    Traditionally, economists have viewed calls for countries to pursue 
policies aimed at protecting national security production capacity 
skeptically. They argued that a nation could, in a globalized world, 
always turn to other countries if the domestic supply chains eroded at 
home. However, what we have learned from the coronavirus crisis is that 
borders do matter because any state has the sovereign right, and 
ability to, restrict exports to the rest of the world. Indeed, the PRC 
government strategically withholds exports: (1) as a bargaining chip to 
extract concessions from trading partners; or (2) to punish trading 
partners that do not bend to its will. Even our allies introduced 
earlier this year--at the height of the pandemic--emergency export 
restrictions over much needed medical equipment in order to provide for 
their own citizens to the detriment of neighbors in need.
    These facts should serve as an important reminder to the United 
States that the security of domestic supply chains is essential, and it 
must be regained because the basic political and economic unit should 
always remain the nation-state. Indeed, the protection of American 
citizens requires that the United States' vulnerable supply chains be 
strengthened, and a major component of supply chain resiliency must be 
reshoring. But how can the United States reverse the excessive 
offshoring that has occurred over the course of the past 40 years?
    The problem is complex, but it can be solved through a whole-of-
Government approach. That is, if we collectively are prepared to tackle 
difficult policy questions, even those that may run counter to long-
held economic biases. To the extent that those biases once formed 
policies that incentivized critical industries to offshore, then 
logically they need to be revised or reversed.
    Understanding what has led to the degradation of our supply chains, 
then it stands to reason that a comprehensive reshoring strategy must 
remedy those causes. At the outset, the United States must 
systematically and routinely identify all products, goods, and 
technologies that are critical to national security to address the 
country's dependency on imports from strategic competitors, whether in 
a time of war, cyber-attack, pandemic or other national emergency. This 
Administration--my office in particular on behalf of the White House--
has begun doing this. We need to continue this on a permanent basis. An 
additional component here is measuring the flow of technology if it is 
now as equally as important, and in many instances more important, than 
the traditional ``national security good.''
    A second essential component of a reshoring strategy is 
incentivizing inward investments in domestic manufacturing and R&D 
activities. We have begun doing this to boost innovation and economic 
growth through tax cuts. A whole-of-Government approach, in partnership 
with Congress, will continue to make this effort successful.
    Third, we have in our arsenal of tools powerful U.S. Government 
procurement authority, including the Defense Production Act authority, 
to provide capital to new American investments and also as a tool to 
generate demand, through U.S. Government purchases, for national 
security-related items that are produced within the United States. 
Reliance on Government procurement authority is what will compel many 
companies to take a leap of faith and re-invest in the United States. 
This is an important tool that we are using and should be empowered to 
use even more.
    Fourth, it is, of course, axiomatic that U.S. investments must be 
encouraged to grow to commercial scale in order to compete against more 
mature foreign competitors. Further, an industry's commercial viability 
will generate robust upstream and downstream supply chains, draw in new 
market entrants to enhance production efficiency and moderate prices, 
attract greater private sector investments, and encourage competition 
to accelerate R&D. These are the fundamental building blocks of a 
resilient domestic supply chain.
    Finally, we have the ability to increase exports of all U.S. 
firms--including those that re-shore to the United States--through 
trade agreements. We have begun to increase exports thorough the U.S.-
Mexico-Canada Trade Agreement and the U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement, and 
we should continue to encourage greater exports through new trade 
deals.
    With the support of Congress, we can build the strongest supply 
chain in the world, enhance our comparative advantage with allies, and 
create an ecosystem where market-based principles prevail and market 
distortions are eliminated. We have begun doing this; we can do more 
together, which is why this hearing is so important.
CONCLUSION
    Historically, through times of adversity, the United States has led 
the world out of war and economic turbulence into recovery. And now 
too, the world will look to the United States to lead the way in 
solving today's supply chain challenges. It should not be forgotten 
that the global economy of the 20th century was developed by the United 
States and, although China is aggressively seeking to shape the global 
economic order of the 21st century, it is not too late to act. While 
the United States remains the largest economic power in the world (a 
status that is not guaranteed as China's exponential growth continues), 
it has the ability and leverage to act in coordination with allies. 
Time is of the essence, and our supply chain vulnerabilities are too 
great to await another national security crisis that may expose this 
country to even more devastation and destruction.
