Thank you, Chairman Smith and Ranking Member 
Dorgan. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to 
address the important issue of Intellectual Property Rights 
Enforcement and challenge, and I hope--I do frankly hope that 
my insight and assessment of some of the things the 
Administration is engaged in does provide an advancement in 
terms of the dialogue we're having and a bit more therapy. We 
can all certainly use it on this issue because it is an 
incredibly frustrating one.
    I thank the Committee for its continued support and 
leadership on issues concerning the protection of American 
intellectual property.
    My office works to leverage the capabilities and resources 
of the U.S. Government to promote effective, global enforcement 
of intellectual property rights. We have built a coordinated 
enforcement model that includes Trade, Commerce, Law 
Enforcement and Customs agencies. We certainly know the rising 
tide of counterfeiting and piracy in China has created enormous 
challenges for U.S. businesses. According to the U.S. Chamber 
of Commerce, the statistic that was certainly discussed, 
worldwide IP theft cost U.S. businesses approximately $250 
billion annually. In a 2005 survey of the U.S.-China Business 
Council, members listed IP enforcement as their greatest single 
concern. Our industry reports that infringement levels in China 
range from 85 to 95 percent for all copyright works, and in 
2005, the value of copyrighted works that were pirated exceeded 
$2.3 billion. In 2005, U.S. Customs reported that China was by 
far the leading source of counterfeit products that were seized 
at our borders, accounting for 69 percent of all seizures.
    Today, I have brought a few examples of the counterfeit and 
pirated goods from China that were actually seized by U.S. 
Customs. These include pirated versions of well-known U.S. 
software, counterfeit pharmaceuticals and dangerously low-
quality electrical equipment, which bears a counterfeit 
Underwriter's Laboratory seal. Though we recognize China has 
expanded their efforts, there are still critical deficiencies 
in IP protection and enforcement. We certainly appreciate the 
recent statements made by President Hu, by Vice-Premier Wu Yi 
and others on improving IP enforcement in China. These are 
steps in the right direction, but we need to see more than just 
statements. It is crucial that China deliver on their 
commitments. The U.S. Government is working on many fronts to 
engage China on IP enforcement, and under President Bush's 
leadership, we have developed a proactive strategy being 
coordinated among a number of agencies. The Bush 
Administration's China IP Strategy is built on four pillars: 
one, bilateral engagement; two, the effective use of all of our 
trade tools; three, the expansion of law enforcement 
cooperation; and finally, direct work with our private sector. 
We are utilizing all of our resources to effectively implement 
our approach. First, we are working through the U.S.-China 
Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, the JCCT, to secure 
bilateral IP commitments. In 2005, we negotiated a 
comprehensive set of commitments with the Chinese Government to 
reduce counterfeiting and piracy. These include increasing 
criminal IP prosecutions in customs enforcement, using only 
legal software in government offices and enterprises, shutting 
down illegal consumer markets in China and joining the World 
Intellectual Property Organization Internet treaties. The next 
meeting of the JCCT will take place in Washington on April 11, 
prior to the visit of Chinese President Hu. Second, we are 
making effective use of all of our trade tools. U.S. Trade 
Representative Portman recently announced the China Top-to-
Bottom Review, which assessed the benefits and challenges in 
U.S.-China trade following China's first 4 years of membership 
in the WTO. Also, the placement of China on the Special 301 
Priority Watch List articulates our specific concerns and 
indicates the significance we place on them. We are using every 
trade tool at our disposal in the WTO, and we consider all 
options to be on the table. We are awaiting China's final 
response to our TRIPS Article 63.3 request and are considering 
whether to file a complaint under the WTO dispute settlement 
process for inadequate protection of IPR. Third, we have begun 
to expand our law enforcement cooperation with the Chinese 
Government. Attorney General Gonzales has laid the groundwork, 
and our law enforcement agencies are working with their 
counterparts in China to share information, expertise and 
investigation techniques. And finally, we work actively with 
the Private Sector to address their concerns and learn from 
their experience. We are expanding the tools and remedies that 
we offer industry from recording their trademarks with U.S. 
Customs to educating small businesses and referring specific 
infringement cases to Chinese officials. In addition, they are 
critical advocates for progress in China as they are active 
participants in that market.
    Mr. Chairman, the Bush Administration is committed to 
stopping intellectual property theft in China and providing 
businesses the tools they need to flourish in a global economy. 
China must deliver on their commitments and achieve measurable 
results as they look to take their place among the world's 
leading economies. As I work to coordinate the U.S. 
Government's IP enforcement efforts, and with your continued 
support and the partnership of this committee, we will be able 
to do even more to provide American businesses and innovators 
with the protection they need.
    America's intellectual property is certainly one of our 
most critical competitive advantages. It's essential to our 
continued economic growth and to our technological leadership. 
We must take advantage of the opportunity to work together to 
better protect the knowledge industries of today so that we may 
continue to see the innovations of tomorrow. Thank you very 
much, and I welcome your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Israel follows:]

   Prepared Statement of Chris Israel, Coordinator for International 
       Intellectual Property Enforcement, Department of Commerce
    Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Dorgan and members of the Committee, 
I am pleased to join you today to discuss the challenge of 
international intellectual property rights enforcement in China.
    I want to thank the Committee for its continued support and 
leadership on issues concerning the protection of intellectual 
property. I look forward to the opportunity to work together to ensure 
that the heart of America's innovation economy, its intellectual 
property, is effectively protected around the world.
    Combating piracy and counterfeiting is a top priority for the Bush 
Administration. This prioritization is evident in the leadership shown 
by President Bush. He has consistently raised IP enforcement with 
foreign leaders, placed the issue on the agenda of the G8 and made it a 
key part of the recent U.S./EU summit. He has also discussed our 
ongoing concerns with leaders of critical markets such as China and 
Russia. He has directed his Administration to address this issue 
actively, aggressively and with a results-oriented approach.
    We are leveraging the capabilities and resources of the United 
States to promote effective, global enforcement of intellectual 
property rights. My office works to coordinate the international IP 
enforcement efforts of the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the 
Department of Commerce--which includes the U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office and the International Trade Administration; the Department of 
Homeland Security--which includes Customs and Border Protection; the 
Department of Justice--including the FBI (Federal Bureau of 
Investigation); and the State Department, among others. Our combined 
efforts are extensive, and this allows us to bring even greater focus, 
energy and prioritization to our IPR efforts.
    I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this leadership, to address 
the growing problem of counterfeiting and piracy in China, and the 
Federal Government's efforts to help protect American intellectual 
property and our industries.
Leadership and Prioritization
    The reasons for the Administration's leadership on IP enforcement 
and for its prioritization are clear.
    First, few issues are as important to the current and future 
economic strength of the United States as our ability to create and 
protect intellectual property. U.S. IP industries account for over half 
of all U.S. exports. They represent 40 percent of our economic growth 
and employ 18 million Americans, who earn 40 percent more than the 
average U.S. wage. The 2006 Economic Report to the President states 
that IP accounts for over \1/3\ of the value of all U.S. corporations, 
an amount equal to almost half of our GDP. Quite simply, our ability to 
ensure a secure and reliable environment for intellectual property 
around the world is critical to the strength and continued expansion of 
the U.S. economy.
    The enforcement of intellectual property rights also carries great 
consequence for the health and safety of consumers around the world. 
The World Health Organization estimates that 10 percent of all 
pharmaceuticals available worldwide are counterfeit. The U.S. Federal 
Aviation Administration estimates that 2 percent of airline parts 
installed each year are fake--or about 520,000 parts. And we have seen 
counterfeit circuit breakers that overheat and explode, brake linings 
made of wood chips and cardboard, and fake power cords. In the world of 
today's sophisticated criminal IP operations, if a product can be 
easily counterfeited, has an immediate demand and provides a good 
profit margin it will be copied. Consumer safety and product quality 
are concerns obviously not on the minds of global IP thieves.
    Finally, the theft of American intellectual property strikes at the 
heart of one of our greatest comparative advantages--our innovative 
capacity. Through the applied talents of American inventors, 
researchers, entrepreneurs, artists and workers, we have developed the 
most dynamic and sophisticated economy the world has ever seen.
    And I truly believe the world is a much better place due to these 
efforts. We have delivered life-saving drugs and products that make 
people more productive. We have developed entirely new industries and 
set loose the imaginative power of entrepreneurs everywhere. And, we 
set trends and market best-of-class products to nearly every country in 
the world.
    A thriving, diversified and competitive economy must protect its 
intellectual property rights. In the recent State of the Union, 
President Bush outlined the American Competitiveness Initiative (ACI). 
ACI strengthens the President's ongoing commitment to research and 
development. We are creating a business environment that encourages 
entrepreneurship and protection of intellectual property. And this 
Administration is doing everything that we can to open markets and 
level the playing field.
    We value our heritage of innovation and exploration--it is not only 
part of our history; it is the key to our future.
    And this future--a future of innovation, exploration and growth 
that benefits the entire world--rests on a basic, inherent respect for 
intellectual property rights and a system that protects them.
Counterfeiting and Piracy in China
    The rising tide of counterfeiting and piracy in China has created 
enormous challenges for U.S. businesses. According to the U.S. Chamber 
of Commerce, worldwide IP theft costs U.S. industry approximately $250 
billion annually. In a 2005 survey of the U.S.-China Business Council, 
members listed IPR enforcement as their greatest concern. Our industry 
reports that infringement levels in China range from 85 to 95 percent 
for all copyright works, and in 2005 the value of copyrighted works 
that were pirated exceeded $2.3 billion. In 2004, U.S. Customs reported 
that China was the number one source of counterfeit products that were 
seized at our borders, accounting for 63 percent of all seizures. And 
though we recognize that China has expanded their efforts, there are 
still critical deficiencies in IPR protection and enforcement.
    As a result of China's continuing problems with IP theft, we posted 
our first IP Attache in Beijing in 2004, and we will be posting 2 
additional IP Attaches in China in 2006. In addition, since 2001, the 
U.S. Government has conducted well over 50 training and capacity 
building programs with Chinese Government officials.
    U.S. Trade Representative Portman recently stated, ``as a mature 
trading partner, China should be held accountable for its actions and 
required to live up to its responsibilities, including enforcing 
intellectual property rights . . . We will use all options available to 
meet this challenge.'' It can be said that, so far, China has not lived 
up to its responsibility to effectively enforce intellectual property 
rights.
    In China, effective enforcement efforts are undermined by: a lack 
of sufficient political will, corruption, local protectionism, 
misallocated resources and training, and a lack of effective public 
education regarding the economic and social impact of counterfeiting 
and piracy.
    Though the problems of IP theft are great in China, let me first 
mention a few positive developments.
    President Hu publicly acknowledged the problem when he met with 
President Bush last September and again in November. Also, the recent 
statements by Chinese Vice-Premier Wu Yi on improving IPR enforcement 
in China and encouraging Chinese businesses to take greater steps to 
protect IP is definitely a step in the right direction. We also 
appreciate the Vice-Premier's comments on ensuring that the Chinese 
Government only uses legal software. The additional announcement, by 
the Vice-Premier, that the Chinese Government is setting up 50 
reporting centers for IPR violations throughout China is good news, and 
we hope that these centers can be effective.
    In December 2005, a Beijing court ruled in favor of several luxury 
trademark brands in a suit to stop sales of knockoff handbags. In that 
case, the court ordered the owner of the Silk Street Market to pay 
damages and stop its vendors from selling the fake goods. This is an 
important ruling because the Chinese courts are finally holding 
landlords responsible for the illegal activities of their tenants.
    In January 2006, Starbucks won a lawsuit against a local company 
that had adopted its Chinese name and a similar logo. The Shanghai 
court fined the company and ordered it to stop using the Starbucks' 
name and issue an apology in a local newspaper.
    In January 2006, the chocolate company Ferrero Rocher won a lawsuit 
against a Chinese company that was producing a copycat version of its 
well known gold-wrapped chocolates. The Chinese court ordered the 
company to pay compensation and to stop producing the copycat product.
    Though these are good examples, the problems in China run deep, and 
we continue to work extensively with the Chinese Government on the 
issues of counterfeiting and piracy.
U.S. Government China Strategy
    The U.S. Government is working on many fronts to engage China on 
IPR, and under President Bush's leadership, we have developed an 
effective China IP strategy. The Bush Administration's China IP 
Strategy is built on four pillars: bilateral engagement; effective use 
of our trade tools; expanding law enforcement cooperation; and working 
with the private sector. We are utilizing all of our resources to 
effectively implement our approach:

        1. Working through the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce 
        and Trade (JCCT) to secure IP commitments;

        2. Effective use of all of our trade tools:

          a.  The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative's China Top-
        to-Bottom Review,

          b.  Special 301 Report,

        c.  The World Trade Organization (WTO) TRIPS Article 63.3 
        request and consider filing a complaint under the WTO dispute 
        settlement process;

        3. Expanding Law Enforcement Cooperation with the Chinese 
        Government;

        4. Private Sector Cooperation.

Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT)
    Established in 1983, the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce 
and Trade (JCCT) is a government-to-government consultative mechanism 
that provides a forum to resolve trade concerns and promote bilateral 
commercial opportunities.
    Led on the U.S. side by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce and the U.S. 
Trade Representative, and on the Chinese side by Vice Premier Wu Yi, 
the status of the JCCT was elevated following the December 2003 meeting 
of President Bush and Chinese Premier Wen to focus higher-level 
attention on outstanding trade disputes. Of particular importance to 
this committee is the work of the U.S.-China JCCT Intellectual Property 
Working Group.
    At the April 2005 JCCT session, the U.S. and China agreed to 
establish an IPR Working Group so that U.S. and Chinese officials, IP 
specialists, and law enforcement authorities could consult on specific 
problems and cooperate on a range of IPR issues. Through the IPR 
Working Group, we are working with the Chinese, helping them take 
concrete steps toward significantly improving IPR protection and 
enforcement.
    President Bush has discussed the issue personally with Chinese 
President Hu Jintao, and President Hu made further commitments during a 
September 2005 United Nations speech. We need to see delivery on these 
commitments and achieve measurable results as China looks to take its 
place among the world's leading economic powers.
    The next meeting of the JCCT will take place on April 11, prior to 
the visit of Chinese President Hu. As the JCCT meeting approaches, it 
is important to look at the status of the comprehensive set of 
commitments from the Chinese Government to reduce counterfeiting and 
piracy that were agreed to in the last meeting of the U.S.-China JCCT. 
These include:

   Increasing criminal IP prosecutions and customs enforcement,

   Expanding law enforcement cooperation,

   Using only legal software in government offices and 
        enterprises, and

   Joining the World Intellectual Property Organization 
        Internet Treaties.

    Out of the many commitments so far, only a few have been completed.
    The Chinese Ministry of Public Security established an IP unit 
responsible for overall research, planning and coordination of all IPR 
criminal enforcement. The unit serves under the auspices of both the 
Economic Crimes Investigation Division and the Social Order Division.
    The Chinese Government recently put in place an IP Ombudsman, Yang 
Guohua, at the Chinese Embassy in Washington. I met with him a few 
weeks ago, and he has also begun meeting with U.S. rights holders.
    The Chinese Government confirmed that the criminal thresholds in 
the 2004 Judicial Interpretation (JI) are applicable to sound 
recordings and that the JI makes exporters subject to independent 
criminal liability. But there have not been any reported criminal cases 
using the new thresholds.
    We also have quite a few commitments that are still in progress and 
others where there has been little if any movement.
    By the end of 2005, China committed to use only legal software at 
all levels of government and to extend this commitment to large 
enterprises, including state-owned enterprises, this year. China claims 
to have completed its government legalization program, but U.S. 
industry says its sales data does not support this claim, and there is 
no other evidence to show that China has moved forward to purchase and 
use only legal software. In a recent interview, Commerce Secretary 
Gutierrez stated that the use of pirated software by China is 
``absolutely unacceptable'' and that this requires more attention from 
the world community.
    Also, as part of our discussions with the Chinese, we continue to 
raise the issue of optical disc piracy. China needs to take steps to 
eliminate all illegal optical disc production. Action especially needs 
to be taken against those ``government licensed'' optical disc plants 
in China that engage in this type of criminal activity. We consider 
this an important issue for our copyright industry, and apart from the 
significant economic damages, this type of piracy harms our cultural 
and creative innovative capacity.
    China has also agreed to regularly instruct enforcement authorities 
throughout the country that copies of select films which are still in 
censorship, and not yet ready for distribution are deemed pirated and 
subject to enhanced enforcement. However, industry reports that 
progress on this initiative has been very uneven.
    This memorandum of understanding (MOU) between China and the Motion 
Picture Association (MPA) protects only the 15 theatrical films 
actually released in China. Industry reports that little progress has 
been made on this initiative.
    The Chinese legal system follows three routes: administrative, 
civil and criminal. U.S. rights holders place primary importance on 
criminal cases being filed against violators of IPR in China. In the 
last JCCT meeting, China committed to increasing the number of criminal 
prosecutions for IPR violations relative to the number of 
administrative cases. This is important because it would send a message 
to those who violate the law that they can not get away with just 
paying a fine--IP theft is a crime, and there will be criminal 
penalties.
    China has also agreed to improve IPR enforcement at trade shows and 
retail and wholesale markets. The United States is working with China 
to: establish IPR monitoring centers at major trade fairs, set up a 
training program, and host a trade fair IPR enforcement seminar to 
educate U.S. and Chinese small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) on 
how to enforce their IPR at an upcoming trade fair. China also agreed 
to ``clean up'' Beijing's Silk Street Market and other well-known 
consumer markets.
    At the major consumer markets, it may appear at first glance that 
the Chinese have made some progress. In January, the Shanghai 
government announced its plans to shut down Xiangyang Market, that 
city's biggest seller of fake goods. According to local reports, the 
Mayor of Shanghai stated that the market had damaged Shanghai's 
reputation, because approximately 80 percent of the city's 
counterfeiting and piracy originates in that market. But that market 
will not close until June 2006, and at that point, most of the vendors 
will be moving to other markets, including one, southwest of the city, 
in Longhua. These illegal markets which exist all over China, continue 
to operate openly and notoriously. They must be shut down or 
permanently be rid of infringing goods. The Chinese Government's 
ability to take active steps to stop the sale and production of 
counterfeit Olympic products demonstrates that they have this ability.
    Also, China is working toward accession to the World Intellectual 
Property Organization Internet Treaties. China recently sent a 
delegation to the United States to discuss the legislative steps 
necessary to accede to the WIPO Internet Treaties. We have problems 
with China's draft legislative package and will continue to communicate 
our concerns to China. It is important China get this right, so that 
China's protections move forward and meet the needs of the digital age.
    The proliferation of fake pharmaceuticals also creates serious 
issues of health and safety. In China, there are certain factories that 
are categorized as unregulated ``chemical factories'' but they 
primarily manufacture the active ingredients for certain drugs. Our 
interest is to have these ``factories'' come under the supervision of 
China's Food and Drug Administration (FDA), so that they can be 
monitored and regulated.
    Additional issues include protecting undisclosed test data against 
unfair commercial use for pharmaceutical products. We also need to see 
clarification and improved coordination between China's patent office 
and the SFDA to prevent generic drug companies from infringing on 
pharmaceutical patents and producing patent infringing drugs.
Effectively Using All of Our Trade Tools
    We are making use of all the trade tools that we have at our 
disposal. As China takes its place as a player on the world economic 
stage, we expect that it will live up to its international obligations 
and uphold the rule of law.
USTR Top-to-Bottom Review
    The Top-to-Bottom review assesses the benefits and challenges in 
U.S.-China trade following China's first 4 years of membership in the 
World Trade Organization. The Top-to-Bottom review announced several 
actions that will be implemented by USTR and other U.S. Government 
agencies; and I will mention a few of them here. First, USTR is 
expanding their trade enforcement capacity to help ensure that China 
complies with its trade obligations. USTR is establishing a China 
Enforcement Task Force to be headed by a Chief Counsel for China Trade 
Enforcement. Second, USTR is expanding its ability to obtain 
comprehensive forward-looking information regarding China's trade 
regime and U.S. trade policy practices by adding additional USTR 
personnel and establishing an Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and 
Negotiation (ACTPN) China Task Force. Third, USTR and the State 
Department are discussing expanding U.S. trade policy and negotiating 
capacity in Beijing to augment our current efforts and more effectively 
pursue top priority issues, such as protecting IPR. Having a trade 
negotiator on the ground is key. This individual will be in constant 
contact with American businesses and Chinese officials, working to help 
remove trade barriers, improve market access and improve IP 
enforcement.
    Through USTR, my office and our inter-agency team, the 
Administration is improving coordination across the U.S. Government. We 
are regularly reviewing our strategies and assessing the progress that 
we have made so that we can continue to take the appropriate next 
steps.
Special 301 Report
    China's placement last year on the Priority Watch List (PWL) 
reflects the significant level of concern that we have concerning 
China's problems with IPR protection, enforcement and market access. 
This ranking sends a global signal to our trading partners and to 
companies seeking to do business in China. It also sends a strong 
message to China that these concerns must be addressed.
World Trade Organization Mechanisms
    In the fight against counterfeiting and piracy, we are using every 
trade tool at our disposal, and we consider all options to be on the 
table. As announced in its Special 301 Report last year, USTR filed a 
formal request under Article 63.3 of the TRIPS agreement (Agreement on 
the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights), asking 
China to detail the specific efforts it has taken to enforce IPR, which 
includes China's application of criminal, administrative, and civil 
remedies for infringement cases that affect U.S. rights holders. We 
were joined in our Article 63.3 request by Japan and Switzerland, who 
also submitted similar requests at the same time. Though China's 
official response was less than forthcoming, we are working, alongside 
our trading partners and with the Chinese Government, to fulfill this 
request.
    China's response will demonstrate whether it is serious about 
enforcing its IPR protections in a transparent open manner.
    The United States is the only country that has brought a case 
against China in the WTO. And the U.S. Government is again left with no 
choice but to consider filing another complaint against China this time 
for inadequate enforcement of IPR. In this regard, USTR is working with 
industry to evaluate facts and develop the necessary information on 
this potential case.
Law Enforcement Cooperation
    Another major priority is to expand law enforcement cooperation 
between the U.S. and China. Progress is being made, and Attorney 
General Gonzales laid the groundwork for expanded law enforcement 
cooperation on IP cases during his trip to China in late 2005.
    Our law enforcement agencies are already working with their 
counterparts in China to share information, expertise and investigation 
techniques.
    The Department of Justice is looking to build on these existing 
efforts and develop even stronger bilateral IPR law enforcement 
cooperation.
    The existing U.S.-China Joint Liaison Group (JLG) works to 
facilitate criminal justice cooperation and has already discussed 
criminal IPR enforcement on the plenary level.
    The U.S. has requested that the Chinese agree to establish an IP 
law enforcement experts group through the JLG. Expanding our IPR law 
enforcement cooperation efforts would enable us to focus on developing 
joint IPR enforcement operations and improve cooperation on criminal 
investigations. In addition, our efforts, led by the Department of 
Justice, would focus on the operational aspects and training linked to 
China's criminal law enforcement efforts to address online piracy. 
Though a nationwide crackdown on Internet piracy has not begun, as 
China has committed to do, China has worked out a plan to focus on 
copyright violations involving audio-video and software products, 
including unauthorized using and sharing at Internet cafes and the 
illegal operation of websites.
    Building on the joint U.S.-China law enforcement effort called 
Operation Spring, the U.S. and Chinese law enforcement authorities 
recently joined forces in Operation Ocean Crossing, successfully 
disrupting an organization engaged in the large-scale trafficking of 
counterfeit pharmaceuticals. The action resulted in numerous arrests in 
China and the United States and the capture of hundreds of thousands of 
fake pharmaceuticals.
    As I stated earlier, China was the number one source of counterfeit 
products that were seized at the United States border last year. The 
Chinese Government needs to better equip its Customs Authorities to 
control the exports of counterfeit and pirated goods from China. An 
important step that China agreed to take at the 2005 JCCT is to adopt 
regulations that allow Customs to refer serious cases for criminal 
prosecution. China should also reinstate provisions in its Customs 
regulations to allow for fines up to 100 percent of the value of the 
seized goods. To take forward China's JCCT commitments on better 
customs enforcement, U.S. and Chinese Customs officials, subject to 
confidentiality concerns, will be cooperating on the exchange of 
infringement data and information on significant seizures. There will 
also be technical exchanges on risk assessment and regulatory 
improvements.
Private Sector Cooperation
    Companies need to be aggressive advocates of their own IP. We are 
working actively with the business community for assistance as we go 
forward. They are our eyes and ears on the ground and know better than 
anyone how inadequate IPR enforcement affects their businesses. My 
office conducts active outreach with industry, and we want to hear 
their stories and find ways to use the data that they have collected in 
China. We will continue to work together to find solutions and lead 
enforcement efforts.
    We are working with U.S. and international trade associations such 
as the American Bar Association, American Chamber of Commerce in China, 
Business Software Alliance, Entertainment Software Association, 
International Chamber of Commerce, International Intellectual Property 
Alliance, International Federation of Phonographic Industries, Motion 
Picture Association, National Association of Manufacturers, The 
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, Quality Brands 
Protection Committee, Recording Industry Association of American, U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce and the U.S.-China Business Council, to name just a 
few.
    An important tool that we use is the IPR Case Referral Mechanism 
(CRM) which was created by the U.S. Government to facilitate the 
submission of individual U.S. company IPR cases through MOFCOM (China's 
Ministry of Commerce) to relevant Chinese agencies. Our inter-agency 
team reviews cases where the Chinese Government fails to provide 
adequate protection of IPR to U.S. businesses, and after an internal 
vetting process, sends approved cases to the Chinese Government to 
facilitate their resolution. Five cases have already been submitted to 
the Chinese through the Case Referral Mechanism.
    Ambassador Clark Randt at our Embassy in Beijing holds an annual 
IPR Roundtable which brings together senior Chinese officials and U.S. 
business representatives. The Roundtable gives U.S. rights holders the 
opportunity to discuss the problems they are facing and find the 
solutions that they need.
    Also, our Embassy and Consulate officers on the ground are a 
valuable asset for U.S. companies. They play a critical role as IPR 
``first responders,'' helping U.S. businesses resolve cases when their 
rights are violated.
    We know that companies are conducting investigations into IPR theft 
and collecting data as they do business in China. But American 
companies should not have to be the sole investigators of IP crime in 
China. The Chinese Government needs to step up to the plate, conduct 
investigations and stop the crime of IP theft that is occurring in 
their country.
    The Bush Administration's efforts to provide a secure and 
predictable global environment for intellectual property is driven by a 
commitment to foster U.S. economic growth, to secure the safety and 
health of consumers everywhere, and an abiding respect for the great 
American innovative spirit that has driven our Nation since its 
founding and will determine our future.
Strategy, Organization and Focus
    As this committee clearly understands, the problem of global piracy 
and counterfeiting confronts many industries, exists in many countries, 
apart from China, and demands continuous attention. With finite 
resources and seemingly infinite concerns, how we focus our efforts is 
crucial. I appreciate this opportunity to share with you the key areas 
which make up the Administration's overall Strategy for Targeting 
Organized Piracy. Through President Bush's leadership, we created a 
five-point plan.

        1. Empower American innovators to better protect their rights 
        at home and abroad.

        2. Increase efforts to seize counterfeit goods at our borders.

        3. Pursue criminal enterprises involved in piracy and 
        counterfeiting.

        4. Work closely and creatively with U.S. Industry.

        5. Aggressively engage our trading partners to join our 
        efforts.

    By working more closely with other U.S. Government agencies, we 
implemented that plan, and we have made progress. I'd like to share 
with you some of the approaches that we are taking and the objectives 
that we have set to improve global IP enforcement.
    Last month, under the leadership of my office and the White House, 
the National Intellectual Property Law Enforcement Coordination Council 
(NIPLECC) held its first principals meeting this year. NIPLECC brings 
together the leaders of the key operational entities within the Federal 
Government that are responsible for IP enforcement. At the meeting, we 
looked at better ways to coordinate our domestic and international IP 
efforts in order to ensure the effective and efficient enforcement of 
IP both at home and abroad. By establishing priorities and objectives 
at a senior level, we are reinforcing our day-to-day activities and 
ensuring that all of the agencies critical to the Federal Government's 
IP enforcement efforts are closely coordinated and committed to a 
common results-oriented agenda.
    The Council is comprised of the Department of Justice (Assistant 
Attorney General of the Criminal Division), the Commerce Department 
(Under Secretary for Intellectual Property and Director of the Patent 
and Trademark Office and Under Secretary for International Trade), the 
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (Deputy USTR), the Department 
of Homeland Security (Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection) 
and the State Department (Under Secretary for Economic, Business and 
Agricultural Affairs).
    NIPLECC has made a number of valuable contributions since its 
creation in 1999, including the development of a comprehensive data 
base that includes all recent IP law enforcement training provided by 
the U.S. Government to developing and least developed nations as well 
as delivering legislative suggestions to improve national IP laws 
related to enforcement. However, there is unmet potential, and in my 
role as Director of NIPLECC, I look forward to working with this 
committee to ensure that we are maximizing the capabilities of NIPLECC.
    A critical element in our overall coordination is the Strategy 
Targeting Organized Piracy (STOP!) Initiative launched by the Bush 
Administration in October 2004. STOP! has built an expansive 
interagency process that provides the foundation and focus for all of 
our efforts. This is the strategy that NIPLECC is implementing. STOP! 
is led by the White House and brings together USTR, the Department of 
Commerce, the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland 
Security and the State Department.
    STOP is the most comprehensive initiative ever advanced to fight 
global piracy where it starts, block bogus goods at America's borders 
and help American businesses secure and enforce their rights around the 
world. STOP! has made significant progress in the past year, and we are 
planning to build on this success. STOP! is an attempt to play offense 
in the global fight against piracy and counterfeiting.
    Through all of these initiatives, we are achieving results, 
maintaining the commitment of senior Administration officials, 
institutionalizing an unprecedented level of coordination within the 
Federal Government and receiving attention around the world. The 
message that we are delivering is--that the United States takes the 
issue of IP enforcement very seriously, we are leveraging all of our 
resources to address it and we have high expectations of all of our 
global trading partners.
    To help American innovators secure and enforce their rights across 
the globe, we have new Federal services and assistance: We created a 
hotline (1-866-999-HALT), which is staffed by specialized attorneys who 
counsel businesses on how to protect their IP and work with callers on 
how to best resolve problems. In cases where the individual or company 
has properly registered its rights, its issue can then be referred to a 
trade compliance team that will monitor their case and work to see what 
next steps can be taken.
    We also developed a website (www.stopfakes.gov) and brochure to 
provide information and guidance to rights holders on how to register 
and protect their IP in markets around the world.
    We created downloadable ``IP toolkits'' to guide businesses through 
securing and enforcing their rights in key markets across the globe. 
These toolkits are available at the stopfakes.gov website, and cover 
countries such as China, Russia, Mexico, Korea and Taiwan.
    In November 2005, Commerce Secretary Gutierrez announced, the China 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Advisory Program. This program is 
done in conjunction with the American Bar Association, the National 
Association of Manufacturers and the American Chamber of Commerce in 
China. It offers small and medium sized U.S. businesses free IPR 
consultation with an attorney.
    Also, we are providing training for U.S. embassy personnel to be 
effective first responders to IPR issues in order to identify problems 
abroad and assist rights holders before fakes enter the market and the 
supply chain.
    Next, we need to increase our efforts to stop fake and counterfeit 
goods at America's borders: Customs and Border Protection (CBP) has 
developed an online recordation tool for rights holders to record their 
trademarks and copyrights with them. Additionally, CBP has also begun 
implementing new risk assessment models and technologies to cast a 
wider, tighter net on counterfeit and pirated goods and to stop these 
goods from entering our borders.
    We are working with our trading partners to share information and 
improve our capabilities to assess and anticipate risks. We have seen 
the results of this effort with the European Union. We have followed up 
on the U.S./EU Economic Ministerial held last year, where leaders of 
both governments committed to expand information sharing of customs 
data.
    We are also working to build international support and rules to 
stem the flow of fake and counterfeit goods and keep them out of global 
supply chains. We have conducted outreach to Canada, the European 
Commission, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Singapore 
and the United Kingdom laying the basis for increasing cooperation on 
IP enforcement. Outreach to other like-minded countries is underway.
    Law enforcement must play a leading role in dismantling criminal 
enterprises that steal intellectual property: U.S. law enforcement 
agencies are also working closely with industry to gather information, 
develop cases and bring convictions against the criminals who steal 
their IP. We need to be as sophisticated and creative as the criminals. 
It is important that government and industry work together with 
coordinated efforts.
    The U.S. Government (Department of Justice) has pursued numerous 
large-scale operations targeting criminal organizations involved in 
online piracy and trafficking in counterfeit goods. For instance, the 
Department of Justice (DOJ) has indicted the four leaders of one of the 
largest counterfeit goods operations ever uncovered in New England--
broke up a scheme to sell more than 30,000 luxury goods--including 
handbags, wallets, sunglasses, coats, shoes, and necklaces, and found 
the materials to manufacture at least 20,000 more counterfeit items.
    The Department of Justice led Operation Site Down, an international 
online piracy investigation culminating in the execution of over 90 
search warrants and arrests in the U.S. and eleven countries abroad in 
June 2005. Operation Site Down dismantled some of the largest and most 
prolific high-level distribution sites preventing tens of million in 
further losses to the content industry. To date, 44 individuals have 
been indicted and ten convicted of felony copyright offenses.
    As part of the STOP! Initiative, the Department of Justice formed 
an Intellectual Property Task Force to examine how it could maximize 
its efforts to protect intellectual property rights. In October of 
2004, the Task Force Report was released and it included a 
comprehensive set of recommendations on steps that the Department of 
Justice could take to better protect IPR.
    In addition the Department of Justice has executed measures to 
maximize law enforcement's ability to pursue perpetrators of IPR 
crimes. For example, we are increasing from 5 to 18 the total number of 
Computer Hacking and Intellectual Property Units in U.S. Attorneys' 
Offices across the country. This increased to 230 (two in virtually 
every U.S. Attorney's Office in the country) the number of specially 
trained prosecutors available to focus on IP and high-tech crimes. As 
part of the Task Force recommendations, the DOJ also appointed an IP 
Law Enforcement Coordinator for Asia, who is stationed in Bangkok. This 
individual will work with DOJ officials in the Computer Crime and 
Intellectual Property Section and the Office of International Affairs 
to oversee their law enforcement efforts in the region.
    The Administration proposed the Intellectual Property Protection 
Act of 2005 to strengthen criminal intellectual property protection, 
toughen penalties for repeat copyright criminals and add critical 
investigative tools for both criminal and civil enforcement 
authorities.
    In addition, we have executed agreements to implement obligations 
of the U.S./EU Mutual Legal Assistance and Extradition Agreements. 
These agreements ensure cooperation regarding intellectual property 
crimes with Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Hungary, 
Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, 
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom; and we have completed 
negotiations with the nine remaining E.U. countries--Cyprus, Czech 
Republic, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Italy, Malta, Poland and Slovakia.
    Working closely and creatively with U.S. industry: As I mentioned 
earlier, we are conducting extensive outreach with U.S. industry and 
trade associations. Additionally, we are working with the Coalition 
Against Counterfeiting and Piracy, a U.S. Chamber of Commerce and 
National Association of Manufacturers led association--on the ``No 
Trade in Fakes'' program to develop voluntary guidelines companies can 
use to ensure their supply and distribution chains are free of 
counterfeits.
    We are also conducting post-entry audits to identify companies 
vulnerable to IP violations and working with them to correct their 
faulty business practices.
    We are reaching out to our trading partners and building 
international support. U.S. leadership is critical and we are active on 
a number of fronts: When U.S. Government officials meet with our global 
trading partners for bilateral and multilateral discussions, IP 
protection and enforcement are always top priorities.
    This Administration makes IPR a priority when negotiating new free 
trade agreements as you saw most recently with CAFTA-DR (the United 
States-Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement).
    In January, we met with European Union Officials at the White House 
for a series of meetings to address global piracy. We are breaking new 
ground and have begun to expand our cooperation with the EU--focused on 
border enforcement, a strategy to address problems in developing 
countries and working with the private sector. Particularly with China, 
the EU announced that they will be posting an IP attache in Beijing.
    At the G8 meeting, President Bush secured an agreement from fellow 
leaders to focus on IP enforcement, and we plan on working with Russia 
on IP issues during their presidency of the G8.
    At APEC last year, we secured an endorsement of a U.S.-Japan 
sponsored ``APEC Anti-Counterfeiting and Piracy Initiative'' to reduce 
trade in counterfeit goods and to combat online piracy, while 
increasing cooperation and capacity building. In close cooperation with 
industry and a number of U.S. Government agencies, USTR led this 
effort, which culminated last November in agreement by the leaders of 
APEC's 21 member economies in a set of model guidelines to reduce trade 
in counterfeit and pirated goods, and to protect against unauthorized 
copies, and to prevent the sale of counterfeit goods over the Internet. 
We are currently working to implement and expand these model 
guidelines.
    Also, the work of the U.S.-Russia IP Working Group remains a high 
priority, as the United States, through USTR, and Russia work to 
address a number of IP-related issues and steps that need to be taken.
    Additionally, we have commissioned a study by the OECD (The 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) to examine the 
impact of global counterfeiting and piracy. My office and our 
interagency team have held several meetings with OECD officials to 
follow-up and assist with this study. We are looking for sound, 
reliable and accurate information to be produced with this study, so 
that we may have accurate metrics that can be used effectively by our 
principals and by industry as we continue building international 
support to stem the flow of fake and counterfeit goods and keep them 
out of global supply chains.
    Next, the U.S. has conducted several hundred IP training and 
capacity building programs around the world to improve criminal and 
civil IPR protection. To that end, the Administration has established a 
Global Intellectual Property Academy to consolidate and expand our 
training programs for foreign judges, enforcement officials and 
administrators.
    We are continuing to expand our IP attache program in China and 
positioning new attaches in Brazil, Russia and India. Having IP 
attaches stationed in these countries will enhance our ability to work 
with local government officials to improve IP laws and enforcement 
procedures in addition to assisting U.S. businesses to better 
understand the challenges of protecting and enforcing their IPR.
    On the domestic front, we have education campaigns that take place 
across America to teach small and medium sized enterprises how to 
secure and protect their rights and where to turn for Federal resources 
and assistance. It is important to note that only 15 percent of small 
businesses that do business overseas know that a U.S. patent or 
trademark provides protection only in the United States. Companies need 
to make sure that they register for intellectual property protection 
overseas. We had an education program in San Diego and a China-specific 
program in Atlanta last week, and we have upcoming programs in 
Nashville, Columbus and Northern Virginia. These events help educate 
businesses on what intellectual property rights are, why they are 
important, and how to protect and enforce these rights domestically and 
internationally.
    Mr. Chairman, the Bush Administration is committed to stopping 
intellectual property theft in China and providing businesses the tools 
they need to flourish in the global economy. As I work to coordinate 
the U.S. government's intellectual property enforcement, trade and 
education efforts; and with your continued support and the partnership 
of this committee, we will be able to do even more to provide American 
businesses and innovators with the protection they need. America's 
intellectual property is important not just for her national security, 
but it is also a necessary component in ensuring continued U.S. 
economic growth and technological leadership. We must take advantage of 
the opportunity to work together to better protect the knowledge 
industries of today so that we may continue to see the innovations of 
tomorrow. Thank you very much.
