Mr. Aldonas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    If I might, I would like to submit my full statement for 
the record and summarize my comments.
    Chairman King. Without objection, so ordered.
    Mr. Aldonas. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Maloney and 
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to 
appear. This is obviously an important topic, and I very much 
appreciate the opportunity to appear to discuss it. I want to 
focus on two aspects of the topic of the hearing, on our trade 
relationship with China and the impact on our manufacturing 
sector.
    I do want to provide a little bit of context at the outset, 
because I think they are facts that are often lost in the 
discussion about our trade with China.
    The first thing is that the United States starts from a 
position of real strength in manufacturing, which is often lost 
in the discussion. The United States remains the largest 
producer and exporter of manufactured goods in the world. 
Standing alone, our manufacturing sector would be the fourth-or 
fifth-largest economy in the world. Our manufacturing sector 
alone is larger than the entire economy of China.
    Productivity and manufacturing, which is the best indicator 
of our future strength, is way up, higher than it was in the 
late 1990s. In fact, in the last 2 years we have seen stronger 
productivity growth than we have at any time since 1960.
    What is more, manufacturing after many months of slow 
growth, as Congressman Manzullo pointed out, is beginning to 
participate in the broader economic recovery. Orders for 
durable goods and the purchasing and managers index, which is 
an indicator of future demand for manufacturers, are up 
significantly.
    Now having said that, there are three statistics which 
generate real cause for concern. The first is the employment 
numbers, which have been discussed; second is the trade 
deficit; and the third is the sharp drop in the share of world 
trade made up by our exports, which is another good indicator 
of our relative competitiveness, our manufacturing sector.
    What drives all three, as you pointed out in your opening 
statement, Mr. Chairman, is the lack of stronger economic 
growth abroad. Now that is not to say that government-imposed 
constraints, like the Chinese currency peg, as John was 
referring to, help the matter. They certainly create a sense of 
unfairness in terms of the trade, which we heard loud and clear 
from manufacturers as we went across the country over the last 
6 months, visiting 23 cities, meeting with manufacturers large 
and small in every industry, basically. And there was no topic 
other than China that was a higher concern from their point of 
view.
    Now having said that, they, too, recognize that growth at 
home and stronger growth abroad were the keys to a broader 
manufacturing recovery. In terms of growth abroad, I do want to 
pick up on the comments of Congressman Kennedy. The problem 
there is, frankly, slow growth in Europe and Japan and certain 
other Asian trading partners that have not yet fully recovered 
from the 1997 financial crisis.
    It doesn't happen to be China. China, together with the 
United States, has accounted for most of the world's economic 
growth this year. China's imports and our exports to China have 
risen significantly despite the currency peg. China's trade 
with the world is roughly in balance as has been noted. Our own 
exports are up 15 percent per year and are growing faster than 
exports to any other destination.
    Now could we do better? Absolutely. And this is where I 
think the peg comes into play.
    I hope no one operates under the illusion that China 
represents a market economy. Many of the drivers of the economy 
and the production of manufactured goods remain in state hands. 
What that means in practical terms is that Chinese companies 
will not face the same capital market pressures that ours do to 
turn a profit, which may be the ultimate subsidy in the system.
    In other words, the common concern identified by U.S. 
manufacturers about the lack of a level playing field went 
right to the heart of both the issue of the exchange rate peg, 
but more fundamentally about the underlying operation of the 
financial markets, which I think is the key that John really is 
turning to. I know that the Treasury has been working on that 
with the Chinese.
    The effect on trade is that a heavy investment in China 
funded by state-owned banks has led to a great deal of capacity 
on the market that continues to pump out manufactured goods 
that are looking for an outlet.
    The question is, how do we respond. John addressed the 
currency side of the equation. I want to say that there are two 
things underway on the trade side. First, we are using every 
opportunity to press the Chinese for full compliance with their 
WTO commitments. The first year following China's accession to 
the WTO, I personally think that both the administration and 
Congress showed an extraordinary amount of patience as China 
worked to pass the literally thousands of new laws that were 
needed to bring the country into compliance with WTO rules.
    But now, as we move deeper into the second year of China's 
participation in the WTO, we need to see the actual enforcement 
of those laws and compliance with WTO rules in other areas. 
Toward that end, the President, Secretary Evans, Ambassador 
Zoellick, Secretary Snow, certainly John, have all made that 
point vigorously to their counterparts in China, as have I.
    Secretary Snow's recent visit represented the start of a 3-
month process in which the administration will be regularly 
engaged in discussions with our Chinese counterparts on these 
issues, including meetings between the President and President 
Hu, at the time of the APEC meetings, Ambassador Zoellick's 
trip to China.
    The Secretary and I will be going to China at the end of 
the month. We will then be followed up with a visit of the 
Chinese premier here in December, as well as a meeting of the 
Joint Committee on Commerce and Trade, at which point WTO 
compliance will be front and center in our discussions.
    Second, we also have been extraordinarily vigilant with 
respect to the injurious effects of other forms of government 
support for Chinese industry. Over 50 percent of the 
antidumping actions initiated by this administration focused on 
imports from China. Nonetheless, I do think we can do a better 
job.
    That is why one of the principal recommendations that we 
will be moving forward with is the creation of an unfair trade 
investigation scheme, which is to adopt a proactive approach 
with respect to trade with China, as well as our other trading 
partners, since this isn't a problem with China alone.
    The point is that we do not have to wait for a petition to 
know that there are unfair trade practices going on, that those 
ought to be investigated when we know of allegations, that we 
ought to certainly be going after the issues that we face with 
our trading partners. And there certainly are industries, like 
tool and die, that we have talked about, Mr. Manzullo, where 
you can see the net effect of a lot of government involvement 
in the Chinese economy, not just the currency peg in terms of 
creating an unlevel playing field.
    Let me stop there, and I will be happy to answer any 
questions you have.
    Thank you.
