Secretary ROSS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee. I thank you very 
much for the opportunity to speak with you today, and for your 
input as we implement bipartisan trade policies that protect 
and defend American families, American workers, and American 
businesses.
    This President has made it clear that his first priority is 
keeping the American people safe. He has also made it clear 
that he will not tolerate unfair trading practices that weaken 
our internal economy to the point where they threaten to impair 
our national security.
    I initiated the steel and aluminum 232 investigations in 
April 2017, and the President signed two memorandums that month 
directing me to proceed expeditiously to conduct these 
investigations and report my findings. I submitted my reports 
to the President in January. The reports found that high levels 
of import penetration are adversely impacting the economic 
welfare of our domestic steel and aluminum industries. We have 
seen plants closed or idle, with attendant loss of jobs, 
skilled workers, and research and development.
    The reports also found that global excess capacity is a 
circumstance that makes it likely that continued high level of 
imports would cause further closures. This all would place the 
United States at risk of being unable to produce sufficient 
steel and aluminum to meet demands for national defense and 
critical infrastructure in an emergency.
    For example, there is only one remaining U.S. producer of 
steel used in electric transformers, a type of critical 
infrastructure, and only one high-volume producer of armor 
plate used in military vehicles and ships. Similarly, there is 
only one high-volume producer of the high-purity aluminum 
needed for defense and aerospace applications.
    The problem is that products with national security and 
critical infrastructure applications account for only a small 
part of overall steel and aluminum consumption, and therefore 
are not enough on their own to sustain healthy, innovative 
steel and aluminum industries. Thus, I recommended that the 
President take one of several different actions to curb 
imports, and thus ensure the long-term viability of our 
Nation's steel and aluminum industries.
    On March 8th, President Trump exercised his authority under 
section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended, to 
impose a 25 percent tariff on steel imports, and a 10 percent 
tariff on aluminum imports. The tariff actions taken by the 
President are necessary to defend America's essential steel and 
aluminum industries against imports that harm our domestic 
industry to the point that they threaten to impair our national 
security.
    The President's 232 decisions are the result of a long and 
well thought-out inter-agency process led by the Commerce 
Department, where we studied the causes of the current 
circumstances and the impacts of our actions. On March 23rd, 
tomorrow, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection will begin 
implementing the tariffs.
    So where do we go from here? We have already announced a 
process whereby domestic industry can be excluded from the 
tariffs, based on national security concerns or a lack of 
domestic supply of a quality product. Our intention is to 
implement these tariffs in a way that minimizes undue negative 
effect on downstream industries, while also weighing the 
national security needs of our military and our critical 
infrastructure.
    The President has also announced that he is suspending the 
tariffs for products from Canada and Mexico pending 
negotiations that would yield satisfactory alternative means to 
address the threatened impairment to U.S. national security.
    We also intend to enter discussions with the EU on behalf 
of their member countries and any country wishing to make such 
an arrangement. The President also maintains further authority 
to alter the tariffs at any time, based on national security 
and other considerations.
    As I said in the beginning, our top priority is the 
security and safety of every American. And that will continue 
to guide us, going forward.
    That was just a brief overview, but I look forward to 
getting into more specific questions and more detail as I 
respond to your inquiries. Thank you.

On March 8, President Trump exercised his authority under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion
Act of 1962, as amended, to impose a 25 percent tariff on steel imports and a I 0 percent tariff on
aluminum imports, with exemptions for Canada and Mexico, in order to protect our national
security. The President's Section 232 decisions are the result of a long and well-thought-out
process led by the Commerce Department, after review and comment through the usual
Administration clearance process. On March 23, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
will begin collecting the tariffs.
Today the United States has only one steel mill that can produce the advanced alloys used in
armored vehicle plating; one aluminum smelter that makes the high grade aluminum needed for
defense aerospace applications; and one steel mill that makes certain material needed for certain
critical infrastructure, like electrical transfom1ers. The tariff actions taken by the President are
necessary to protect America's essential steel and aluminum industries which have been banned
by imports to the point that allowing imports to continue unchecked threatens to impair our
national security. These imports stem from a variety of reasons, including industrial export
policies of our trading partners, unfair trade practices, and massive global excess production,
particularly by China. 

I initiated the steel and aluminum Section 232 investigations in April 2017 and the President
signed two memorandums that month directing me to proceed expeditiously to conduct these
investigations and report my findings. Section 232 investigations include consideration of:
domestic production needed for projected national defense requirements; domestic industry's
capacity to meet those requirements; the existing and anticipated availabilities of human
resources, products, raw materials, production equipment and facilities, and other supplies and
services essential to the national defense; the growth requirements of domestic industries to meet
national defense requirements and the supplies and services, including the investment,
exploration and development necessary to assure such growth; the impact of foreign competition
on the economic welfare of individual domestic industries; and any substantial unemployment,
decrease in revenues of government, loss of skills or investment, or other serious effects resulting
from the displacement of domestic products by excessive imports, without excluding other
factors, in determining whether such weakening of our internal economy may impair the national
security. In January 2018, I delivered two reports to the President on the effects of imports of
steel and aluminum on the national security. The Commerce Department recommended that
President Trump take action to protect the long-term viability of our nation's steel and aluminum
industries.
We concluded that steel import levels and global excess capacity are weakening our domestic
economy and therefore threatens to impair our national security. The level of foreign steel
imports threatens to impair the national security by displacing domestic production. Six basic
oxygen furnaces and four electric arc furnaces have closed since 2000 and employment bas
dropped 35 percent since 1998. Global excess capacity will cause U.S. producers to face more and more competition from foreign imports as other countries increase their exports to further
their own economic objectives. China is by far the largest producer and exporter of steel, and the
largest source of excess steel capacity. China's excess capacity alone exceeds the total U.S.
steel-making capacity by at least three times.
We also concluded that the quantities and circumstances of aluminum imports are weakening our
economy and threaten to impair national security. Rising levels of foreign imports put domestic
producers at risk of losing the capacity to produce aluminum needed to support critical
infrastructure and national defense. Aluminum imports have risen to 90 percent of total
domestic demand for primary aluminum, up from 66 percent in 2012. From2013-2016,
aluminum industry employment fell by 58 percent, six smelters shut down, and only two of the
remaining five smelters are operating at capacity, even though demand has grown considerably.
The report found that excess production and capacity, particularly in China, has been a major
factor in the decline of domestic aluminum production. We concluded that if no action were
taken, the United States could be in danger of losing the capability to smelt primary aluminum
altogether.
The tariffs on steel and aluminum are anticipated to reduce imports to levels needed for these
industries, in combination with good management, to achieve long-term viability. As a result,
these industries will be able to re-open closed mills, sustain a skilled workforce, invest in needed
research and development, and maintain or increase production. The strengthening of our
domestic steel and aluminum industries will reduce our reliance on foreign producers. It is true that higher steel and aluminum costs could mean price increases for American
consumers. However, any increases should be small for individuals and families. According to
Commerce Department estimates, monthly payments for a typical mass-market automobile may
increase by $4 because of the tariffs. We believe that is a fair price to pay for protecting national
security.
The United States is not the only country that has expressed concern about the types of unfair
trade practices and excess capacity that are prevalent in the steel and aluminum industries.
Countries like China have provided massive subsidies to their companies and this is harming
markets worldwide. As described in the Presidential proclamations announcing these actions,
the President welcomes any country with which we have a security relationship to discuss
alternate ways to address the threatened in1pairment of the national security caused by imports
from that country. The President has left open an avenue for potentially modifying or removing
a tariff under certain conditions for individual countries.
In addition, the President authorized the establishment of a mechanism for U.S. parties to apply
for exclusions of specific products based on demand that is unmet by domestic production or for
specific national security considerations. This process is being managed by the Commerce
Department in consultation with other Federal agencies. We published an interim final rule in
the Fell era/ Register on March 19 establishing the procedures for the exclusion process.
Only individuals or organizations using steel and aluminum articles subject to the tariffs in
business activities (e.g., construction, manufacturing, or supplying steel or aluminum to users) in the United States may submit exclusion requests. This limitation recognizes the close relation of
the economic welfare of the nation to our national security, by affording those who contribute to
that economic welfare through business activities in the United States, the opportunity to submit
exclusion requests based on particular economic and national security considerations. Allowing
individuals or organizations not engaged in business activities in the United States to seek
exclusion requests could undermine the adjustment of imports that the President determined was
necessary to address the threat to national security posed by such imports. Any individual or
organization in the United States may file objections to steel and aluminum exclusion requests,
but the Commerce Department will only consider information directly related to the submitted
exclusion request that is the subject of the objection. The review period for exclusion requests
will normally not exceed 90 days.
The Commerce Department will also continue to monitor imports of steel and aluminum in
accordance with the President's March 8 proclamations.
We will not hesitate to continue standing up for American families, American businesses, and
American workers.
Thank you for allowing me to testify on this vital national security matter and I look forward to
answering questions from members of the committee 