Thank you Chairman Brown, Ranking Member 
Scott, and distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank you 
for inviting me to testify today about the Commerce 
Department's Bureau of Industry and Security's ongoing efforts 
to counter China's military modernization and human right 
abuses.
    In the past year, BIS and our dual-use export control tools 
have stepped into the spotlight. In February 2022, we cutoff 
Russian access to technology it needs to wage its brutal war 
against Ukraine. We barred the export of thousands of weapons 
components and other items needed by Russia's military, 
including classic dual-use items like radio frequency 
converters. Working with 38 allies and partners, we are also 
barring certain exports to countries helping Russia, including 
Iran and its drone programs.
    With the advanced computing rule we released in October of 
last year, BIS has hammered China's ability to use artificial 
intelligence and supercomputing power to develop its military. 
We are restricting exports of leading-edge semiconductors and 
also of semiconductor manufacturing equipment and related 
activities by U.S. persons. Even foreign-made chips produced 
with certain U.S. technology or tooling are restricted.
    China has tried to characterize our actions as meant to 
restrain its economic growth. Let me be clear. Advanced 
semiconductors are key to developing advanced weapons. They 
also support surveillance systems for human rights abuses. We 
focus solely on national security and human rights 
considerations when imposing these measures.
    It bears noting that when we impose controls involving 
products made overseas we work closely with other manufacturing 
countries. BIS embraces the significant responsibility of 
working with international partners to explain the rationale 
for our export control policies and, where possible, including 
them in our efforts.
    In addition to technology-specific controls, BIS has 
restricted exports to organizations acting against U.S. 
national security and foreign policy interests by adding them 
to our Entity List. Of the nearly 700 PRC parties on the BIS 
Entity List, over 200 have been added during this 
Administration.
    Since implementing these restrictions, we have seen the 
increasing impact of our controls, including through desperate 
efforts by Russia and China to obtain the items we have cutoff. 
This shows that our controls are working. And even as we hone 
current controls in our ever-evolving technological landscape, 
BIS is focused on our next moves--reviewing the cutting-edge 
technology areas of autonomous systems, quantum information 
sciences, biotechnology, and advanced materials and 
manufacturing.
    Export controls are not being used to pursue economic 
decoupling with China. Our approach to China is calibrated and 
targeted. China's military civil-fusion strategy, under the 
Chinese Communist Party's Government system, necessitates 
stronger export controls targeting advanced commercial items 
that can be used in military applications.
    We seek to counter China's military modernization by 
restricting key sensitive technologies without undercutting 
U.S. technological leadership or unduly interfering with 
commercial trade that does not undermine national security. 
This is all part of the review of our approach to China that 
Under Secretary Alan Estevez has identified to this Committee.
    Moreover, BIS never acts alone. I am deeply grateful for 
our partnership with the Defense, Energy, and State 
Departments, as well as the intelligence community and law 
enforcement agencies. Following collectively agreed-upon 
policies and considering all sources of information--open 
source, business proprietary, and classified--we work together 
to closely scrutinize license applications involving 
transactions with China.
    Last calendar year, license applications involving China 
were about 13 percent of all the license applications we 
received, 5,064. We denied or returned without action about 26 
percent of China applications. And on average, we spent a lot 
more time scrutinizing these applications, 90 days last year, a 
little over double the 43 days we took to process non-China 
applications. We prioritize comprehensive review, and we are 
taking the time to ensure that China license applications are 
carefully reviewed.
    BIS is laser focused on aggressively and appropriately 
contending with the strategic technology threat posed by China. 
We will continue to use all our tools to counter China's 
efforts to outpace the United States and our allies to the 
benefit of its military.
    Thank you, and I welcome your questions this morning.
