Mr. Spooner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator DeMint, and 
Senator Brown. I'm pleased to be here today to share some 
thoughts on the United States' trade relationship with China. 
American companies face a number of challenges as they try to 
compete with China, from market barriers and intellectual 
property issues to unfair trade practices. Nevertheless, the 
relationship with China is generally a positive one, with 
benefits to U.S. manufacturers, farmers, service industries, 
and consumers.
    For 35 years it has been the policy of the United States 
across every administration to engage China as it moves toward 
market economics. The United States derives clear benefits from 
trading with China and by doing so within a framework which 
requires China to abide by international obligations. This 
policy culminated in China's accession to the WTO in 2001, so 
that for the first time China had both rights and 
responsibilities in the international trading system.
    U.S. exports to China are booming. China is our fastest 
growing major export market and is now our fourth largest 
overall export market. U.S. exports to China totaled $55 
billion in 2006, up 32 percent from the prior year. U.S. 
exports to China are now greater than U.S. exports to India, 
Brazil, and France combined. Our companies and consumers derive 
benefits from imports from China as well.
    At the same time, we face real challenges with our trade 
relations with China. To use one example, China is on the path 
of creating global oversupply in the steel industry. Chinese 
steel capacity is now greater than that of the U.S., Europe, 
and Japan combined. Further, we have recently faced some 
serious challenges regarding the safety of Chinese imports. 
Challenges which the administration is addressing by 
establishing an inter-agency working group on import safety, to 
be chaired by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The 
working group will identify where improvements can be made and 
ensuring the safety of imports through cooperation with 
Federal, State, and local government agencies, foreign 
governments, and U.S. importers.
    Commerce is addressing these and other challenges with a 
multipronged approach to bring about positive changes in 
China's trade policies, regulations, and practices to level the 
playing field. Commerce's China efforts fall into three general 
areas: tough-minded negotiations to achieve better market 
access, aggressive enforcement of our trade laws to fight 
dumping and subsidies, and high energy trade promotion to help 
U.S. companies compete and win in the Chinese marketplace.
    Our negotiations take place primarily through the Joint 
Commission on Commerce and Trade, which meets once a year and 
is chaired by the Commerce Department and USTR, with high level 
participation from USDA, and the Strategic Economic Dialogue 
led by the Treasury Department. Because of our aggressive trade 
enforcement, 27 percent of our antidumping duty orders are in 
imports from China, and recently we preliminarily determined to 
reverse a 23-year-old government policy by applying our anti-
subsidy law to China. Indeed, I was in China last week to lead 
our on-the-ground investigation of subsidies and the rest of 
the China team is still in China conducting verification and 
will return to the United States at the end of this week. We 
can and should remedy subsidies in China when they exist and 
it's in our mutual interest to do so.
    Our export promotion activity means that we devote more 
personnel and activity to China than to any other market, with 
substantial benefits to U.S. exporters. The Commerce China 
team, a staff of 130 supported by our China trade specialists 
in Washington and field offices throughout the United States, 
work directly with companies, particularly small and medium 
size enterprises, interested in exporting to China to develop 
market opportunities, facilitate business, and to solve 
problems.
    We believe this threefold strategy provides the right mix 
to help American workers and to help China continue on the path 
of reform and to become a responsible stakeholder in the global 
economy.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'm happy to take any 
questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Spooner follows:]

  Prepared Statement of Hon. David M. Spooner, Assistant Secretary of 
    Commerce for Import Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce

    Mr. Chairman, Senator DeMint, Members of the Subcommittee, I am 
pleased to be with you today to share some thoughts on the United 
States' trade relationship with China. In our view, this relationship 
is in general a positive one, with benefits to U.S. manufacturers, 
workers, farmers, ranchers, and service providers. However, at the same 
time, we recognize that U.S. companies face a number of challenges as 
they try to compete in China, from market barriers and intellectual 
property issues, to unfair trade practices in which Chinese companies 
might engage in the U.S. or other markets. Further, we have recently 
faced some serious challenges regarding the safety of Chinese imports. 
Let me begin with an overview.
Overview of U.S.-China Relations
    Since China started down the path of reform some thirty years ago, 
it has enjoyed some of the highest rates of sustained economic growth 
the world has ever seen. We welcome China's move toward market-based 
economics.
    Indeed, it has been the policy of the United States, across all 
administrations to engage China politically and economically as it has 
struggled to move toward market economics. In the 35 years since the 
signing of the Shanghai Communique, U.S. economic policies have had two 
main goals: to help China move to a rules-based system and to help 
China internationalize its economy. These policies culminated with 
China's accession to the WTO in 2001, which resulted in China's 
membership in the world's primary forum for economic engagement. China 
now has both the rights and responsibilities that come with membership 
in the international trading system.
    The U.S. has also benefited from this policy. China is one of our 
fastest growing markets and is now our fourth largest export market. 
U.S. exports to China totaled $55 billion in 2006, up 32 percent from 
the previous year. To put this in perspective, U.S. exports to China 
were greater than U.S. exports to India, Brazil and France combined. 
According to industry surveys, U.S. companies in China are generally 
successful and report solid sales in the China market. And our 
companies and consumers derive benefits from imports from China as 
well.
    At the same time, we must recognize that there are a range of trade 
and economic practices in China that most would consider unfair. For 
example, the non-market driven growth of China's steel industry risks 
creating global over supply, and China's efforts to legislate policies 
that protect significant segments of domestic industry at the expense 
of foreign competitors, as evidenced by the latest draft of China's 
Anti-Monopoly Law, foster an unlevel playing field in China.
    At the Department of Commerce our China work falls into three 
general areas: tough-minded negotiations to achieve more access to 
markets; aggressive enforcement of our trade laws to fight illegal 
dumping and subsidies; and a strong commitment to trade promotion to 
help U.S. companies compete and win in the Chinese marketplace.
    Let me provide a description of some of the things we are doing in 
each of these areas.

Commerce's Role in Trade Policy
    The most important mechanism we have to promote policy change in 
China is through trade negotiations. We regularly consult with China on 
a range of trade policies, regulations, and practices in order to 
improve the business environment in China for our companies and for 
exported goods and services.
    To achieve our objectives, we are engaging the Chinese through 
bilateral consultations, chiefly the Joint Commission on Commerce and 
Trade (JCCT), co-chaired by the Commerce Department and USTR, and the 
Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED), led by the Treasury Department.

Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT)
    For almost 25 years, the JCCT has served as a bilateral 
consultative mechanism to resolve specific trade concerns and promote 
commercial opportunities. Since 2004, the JCCT has met at an elevated 
level, with Secretary Gutierrez and U.S. Trade Representative Schwab 
now chairing the U.S. side and Vice Premier Wu Yi chairing the Chinese 
side. At the last JCCT in 2006, the U.S. and China reached agreement on 
a number of matters, such as: (1) eliminating some redundant regulatory 
requirements for medical device imports; (2) improving enforcement of 
intellectual property rights by requiring installation of legitimate 
operating systems software; (3) a deadline for China to commence formal 
negotiations to join the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement; and 
(4) reviewing export control cooperation. In addition, China announced 
that its State Council issued a notice requiring that all laws, 
regulations, and measures affecting trade be published in a single 
official journal. We expect to hold the 18th session of the JCCT in 
late fall in Beijing.
    Chinese and U.S. officials meet in a number of JCCT Working Groups 
throughout the year to address issues such as tourism, IPR, high 
technology, subsidies and export controls. In addition, we continue to 
engage China on rising steel imports through a dialogue on steel.

Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED)
    The U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) provides an 
additional forum for advancing our trade agenda. The second meeting of 
the SED was held May 22-23 in Washington, and the third will be held in 
December in Beijing.
    The SED is a mechanism for maintaining strong and mutually 
beneficial economic and trade relations between the United States and 
China. The Commerce Department works closely with Treasury, USTR, State 
and other agencies to promote long-term structural change. At the 
meeting in May, leaders from both countries agreed to liberalize air 
services rights, undertake further financial sector reforms, work to 
foster energy security, and take additional steps to protect the 
environment and strengthen the rule of law.

Commerce's Enforcement Role: Enforcing Trade Laws and Agreements
    The second area in our approach to China, the focus of my 
responsibilities at Import Administration within the Department of 
Commerce, is aggressive enforcement of our trade laws to ensure a 
balanced playing field for American manufacturers, a task to which the 
Administration is fully committed. Commerce currently maintains 62 
antidumping duty orders on imports from China, including consumer 
goods, steel products, agricultural products, seafood, and chemicals. 
These orders represent 27 percent of the total antidumping duty orders 
we currently have in effect globally and cover almost $6 billion in 
imports.
    Earlier this year, Commerce preliminarily modified a 23-year-old 
government policy by applying the anti-subsidy law to China. In the 
countervailing duty investigation of coated free sheet paper from 
China, Commerce preliminarily determined that the current nature of 
China's economy does not create the obstacles to applying the anti-
subsidy law that were present in the ``Soviet-style economies'' at 
issue when we originally developed our policy more than 20 years ago. 
China of 2007 is not the Soviet Bloc of 1984. Our preliminary 
determination reflects the view that we can and should measure and 
remedy subsidies in China when they exist. We will be issuing our final 
determination in October of this year.
    Just as China has evolved, so should the range of tools available 
to make sure that China trades fairly. Indeed, I was just in China last 
week for an on-the-ground investigation of subsidies to China's paper 
industry. Additionally, my agency is now investigating subsidies to 
China's steel industry.
    To further ensure that China lives up to its trade commitments, the 
U.S. also makes use of the WTO dispute resolution process. In January 
2006, the U.S. warned China about the imminent filing of a WTO case 
challenging an antidumping order imposing duties on imports of kraft 
linerboard from the United States, and the Chinese side quickly 
rescinded that order. We now have four WTO cases against China. In 
2006, the United States, Europe, and Canada brought a WTO dispute 
challenging China's discriminatory charges on imported auto parts. In 
February 2007, the United States filed a case challenging China's use 
of prohibited export and import substitution subsidies. In April 2007, 
we filed two more WTO cases against China--one raised a number of IP 
enforcement issues, and the other focused on market access restrictions 
affecting U.S. copyright-intensive products such as publications, and 
audio and video products. In addition, China remained on the Priority 
Watch List in USTR's Special 301 report and subject to Section 306 
monitoring based on their record of IP protection.
    Clearly, a fair and tough-minded approach to enforcement of our 
trade laws and agreements is a critical component of our engagement 
with China.

Commerce's Trade Promotion Role: Assisting U.S. Exporters in China
    Beyond negotiations and our trade enforcement work, the Commerce 
Department's mission is to ensure that American companies can compete 
and win in the Chinese market. Our Commerce team in China constitutes 
our largest overseas presence, with a staff of 130. The China Team, 
supported by our China trade specialists in Washington and our export 
offices across the United States, work directly with companies, 
particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), interested in 
exporting to China to develop market opportunities, facilitate business 
and solve problems.

Developing Market Opportunities: Activities in China
    Through our Commercial Service, we assist U.S. companies in areas 
such as export counseling, customized market research, qualified 
international contacts and trade leads, match-making, and trade events.

   In response to a 2004 Congressional mandate, we have opened 
        American Trading Centers in 14 key cities. The American Trading 
        Centers initiative opens up large and growing, but underserved 
        markets, helping U.S. firms compete for major local 
        infrastructure projects and sell directly to Chinese importers. 
        These Centers provide targeted market research; counseling; 
        match-making with local Chinese buyers, importers, etc.; and 
        representation at trade shows.

   The Commerce Gold Key Program helps U.S. companies find a 
        buyer, partner, agent or distributor. In FY 2006, 182 companies 
        participated in this program in China, up from 103 in 2005.

   In 2006, the China team recorded 719 export successes 
        related to China, with a value of $3.1 billion, compared to 250 
        export successes in China, valued at $1.9 billion in 2001.

   In 2006, the Department participated in 37 major trade shows 
        in China, compared with only four shows in 2004. Additionally, 
        we supported more than 50 trade missions in China in 2006.

Business Outreach: Activities in the United States
    Commerce manages a range of outreach programs across the United 
States: road shows, websites, webinars and a hotline. Through these 
programs, Commerce assists companies of all sizes to enter the China 
market and provides additional information on Federal resources and 
assistance.

   China Business Information Center: The China Business 
        Information Center (CBIC) provides China-related information to 
        enable U.S. exporters to promote products and services, 
        understand Chinese laws and customs, obtain market research, 
        and take steps to enter the Chinese market. Since its October 
        2004 launch, the CBIC has organized or participated in more 
        than 213 outreach events in 41 states, reaching almost 13,600 
        business executives with information, advice and direction on 
        exporting to China. The CBIC website attracts more than 1,400 
        visitors per day on average and has recorded more than 24 
        million hits.

   Commerce works with industry associations and local 
        governments on a series of Doing Business in China seminars 
        targeting SMEs around the country. In 2006, Commerce hosted 70 
        outreach events, attended by 5,250 participants.

   The Commerce Advocacy Center serves as a central U.S. 
        Government (USG) point of contact through which U.S. companies 
        can access government resources and request USG advocacy in 
        competing for international government tenders. To date in FY 
        2007, USG advocacy has already successfully assisted American 
        companies in winning tenders in China worth about $4.4 billion, 
        with more than $3.8 billion in U.S. export content.

   To assist U.S. companies (particularly SMEs) in protecting 
        their intellectual property rights, Commerce has developed a 
        wide range of services to provide up-to-date information on 
        protecting and enforcing IPR at home and abroad, including 
        information on registration, border enforcement, and criminal 
        enforcement. A Commerce hotline, 1-866-999-HALT, allows U.S. 
        exporters to submit requests for assistance.

   Commerce's China Office hosts free monthly webinars and 
        gives presentations on China IPR issues to assist U.S. 
        industry. More than 850 online participants have participated 
        in the 13 webinar programs, with more than 3,000 visits to the 
        archived programs. In 2006, our China Office and Office of 
        Intellectual Property Rights experts gave presentations in 
        cities across the United States providing guidance to SMEs on 
        how to protect their IPR abroad. Further, from 2005 to the 
        present, the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) 
        has also been actively engaged in assisting U.S. companies on 
        how to protect/enforce intellectual property rights through its 
        China Road Shows, 2-day seminars, and workshops conducted 
        throughout the U.S.

   ITA's Office of Intellectual Property Rights has recruited 
        the expertise of the Patent and Trademark Office and the Small 
        Business Administration to develop an online training program 
        for SMEs to learn how to evaluate, protect, and enforce their 
        intellectual property rights. The program will be offered 
        online at StopFakes.gov free of charge, and is scheduled to be 
        launched in September 2007.

Problem-Solving in China
    When U.S. companies encounter problems in China, our China team is 
available to provide on-the-ground assistance. In addition to our trade 
specialists who cover a wide range of trade issues, the Commerce 
Department has experts dedicated to resolving IPR, subsidies, dumping, 
and export control issues. With IPR problems, Commerce has developed 
industry partnerships linking businesses with lawyers who have China 
expertise, and a program with the Chinese Government to ensure that 
specific IPR cases are passed to relevant Chinese agencies to be 
resolved.

   Commerce has posted two ``Intellectual Property (IP) 
        Attaches'' at our Embassy in Beijing, and an additional IP 
        attache will be joining the Consulate in Guangzhou. These IPR 
        attaches work with the Chinese government to ensure that China 
        is living up to its IPR commitments and to assist American 
        businesses in protecting their IPR in China. One of the key 
        tools they use to help U.S. industry is the ``IPR Case Referral 
        Mechanism'', where China's Ministry of Commerce serves as the 
        point of contact for individual IPR cases raised by the United 
        States. In addition, last year Commerce's China Office 
        effectively handled IPR concerns raised by U.S. SMEs by 
        partnering with industry associations on the China Advisory 
        Program--offering U.S. businesses free IPR consultation with an 
        attorney. Forty-seven companies have utilized the program since 
        its inception. The success of this program has led to expanded 
        advisory programs for SMEs doing business in Brazil, Russia, 
        India, Egypt, and Thailand.

   Commerce has also posted two ``specialists in dumping and 
        subsidies law'' at our embassy in Beijing to assist our 
        Washington-based Trade Remedy Compliance Office, which 
        specializes in China trade remedy cases.

   We have a Trade Facilitation Office at the U.S. Embassy in 
        Beijing which assists companies with compliance and market 
        access problems and hosts industry-specific IPR roundtables in 
        China with U.S. companies based in China to discuss the 
        protection and enforcement of IPR in China, and how the U.S. 
        Government and the private sector can work cooperatively to 
        address industry's specific IPR issues.

   Commerce's Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) has an 
        Export Control Officer posted in Beijing to conduct end-use 
        visits and work with Chinese government and industry on export 
        control issues. End-use visits help increase confidence that 
        sensitive U.S. technology is used for legitimate purposes and 
        therefore facilitates high tech trade.

Consumer Safety Issues
    Finally, I would like to say a few words on the issue of the recent 
high profile alerts and recalls by the FDA, Consumer Products Safety 
Commission, and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
(NHTSA) as a result of imports from China. Safety, of course, is of 
paramount importance to all of us. The Administration's response to 
unsafe--imports has been aggressive. HHS recently announced the 
creation of a food safety czar within FDA, the Administration is 
working constructively with the Chinese and will continue doing so in 
order to ensure the safety of all food, medicines and other products 
imported from China, and on July 18 President Bush issued an Executive 
Order establishing the Interagency Working Group on Import Safety, led 
by HHS Secretary Leavitt and including Secretary Gutierrez and other 
Cabinet Officials, to identify further steps we can take to enhance the 
safety of all imports into the United States.

Closing
    The engagement I have mentioned constitutes a multi-pronged 
approach, designed to bring about positive changes in China's trade 
policies, regulations, and practices to level the playing field. This 
overall trade strategy is pursued by Commerce, USTR, State, Treasury, 
and many other U.S. agencies involved in U.S.-China trade relations. 
This integrated, mutually reinforcing strategy is the best way to 
ensure successful outcomes in U.S.-China trade relations.
    A strong, healthy trade relationship is essential for the benefit 
of both our countries. We will continue to work to ensure that the 
Chinese Government provides market access for U.S. firms, and lives up 
to its international trade commitments. American companies, workers and 
farmers can compete with anyone in the world, given a level playing 
field, and we are committed to working with our Chinese counterparts to 
achieve this goal.
    As China continues to reform its economy, we believe our approach 
will move China away from its reliance on industrial policies and 
subsidies and toward greater adherence to its international trade 
obligations and more progress on the path toward a market economy. 
After all, a China that is part of the international trade community 
and that is open and fair in its economic dealings, is very much in the 
interests of the United States.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to take any questions.
