Thank you, Art, for that introduction and to the team at Bloomberg for inviting me here today.

I'm looking forward to sitting down with Al to discuss the U.S.-China trade relationship in greater detail.

It’s a critical conversation for policymakers and certainly for investors, because we are at a turning point in the U.S.-China economic partnership.

It is a partnership that in many ways, has been defined by the China price.

Over two decades, China became the workshop of the world, with its factories manufacturing and assembling low-cost goods and selling them all over the world.  It has been a mutually beneficial arrangement.

In America, consumers got an impressive array of inexpensive merchandise. And in its transition into the world's top exporting nation, China has lifted millions of its citizens into a fast-growing middle class.

But this past is not a sustainable future. The debt-fueled consumption binge in developed countries like the United States is over. And China realizes that there are limits and drawbacks to purely export-driven growth.

For the sake of stability and prosperity in both our countries – we need a more equitable economic partnership.

Both countries are taking positive steps in that direction.

The United States is already significantly increasing its exports – up 17 percent last year – with exports to China leading the way. They were up 34 percent between January and November.

Meanwhile, the private savings of U.S. consumers are increasing. 

At the same time, the Chinese leadership has made rebalancing its economy one of the cornerstones of its twelfth five-year plan, including measures to spur domestic demand like increased social spending and boosting the minimum wage.

The Chinese government is also putting an intensive focus on strategic emerging industries, with a greater focus on areas like healthcare, energy and high technology.

U.S. businesses have the technical know-how, the resources and the desire to help China develop these industries, if only the Chinese will let them in. 

Foreign businesses are restricted from participating in a variety of Chinese industries.  In others, the Chinese select national champions in key industries like mining, power generation and transportation, and effectively shut out foreign competition. 

This is hardly the only commercial concern in China.

When I talk to business leaders across America, they continue to express significant concerns – shared by business around the world – about the business environment in China, especially:

China's lax intellectual property protection and enforcement;
Lack of transparency in government decision-making; and
Numerous indigenous innovation policies that often preclude foreign companies from vying for Chinese government contracts.
The complaints are different, but the fundamental problem often boils down to the distance between the promises of China's government and its actions.

Even when Chinese leaders make strong statements of principle to take action on an issue of concern, those principles don't always turn into binding law.  And even if those laws are written, actual implementation at the local or provincial level is often left wanting.

Look at the issue of intellectual property. We have heard Chinese leaders condemn IP-theft in the strongest terms, and we’ve seen central government laws and regulations written to reflect that sentiment.

But American and other foreign companies – in industries ranging from pharmaceuticals and biotechnology to entertainment – still lose billions of dollars from counterfeiting and IP-theft in China every year.

Here’s a way to understand the scope of the problem:  In the United States, for every dollar in computer hardware sales, there is about 88 cents in software sales.  But in China, for every dollar in hardware sales, there is only eight cents in software sales.   

According to the Business Software Alliance, that discrepancy is largely explained by the fact that nearly 80 percent of the software used on computers in China is counterfeit.

At the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade in December, we made some progress on the illegal software issue, with China agreeing to increase its budgets for software in government ministries and large state-owned enterprises. 

Of course, this dealt with a problem we thought we had solved in 2006, when China issued a regulation requiring government ministries to buy computers with licensed software pre-loaded.  They just never put any money behind the commitment.

Or look at what's been happening with the wind energy market in China.  For the last two years, the U.S. government has effectively been playing whack a mole to get rid of rules that discriminate against US companies who want to participate.

We knocked down one rule in 2009 — China committed to stop imposing domestic content requirements on wind turbines used on Chinese wind farms—and another popped up. 

The new rule required companies that wanted to build wind farms in China to prove they had previous experience operating in China.  Even if a company had ample international experience building wind farms, that would not count.  In December 2010, we got the Chinese to drop that rule.  

This type of behavior simply has to change. 

The fact is that China has benefited tremendously from a rules-based international trading system since it joined the WTO in 2001.

The United States and other foreign nations have every right to insist that China implements the market-opening policies it agreed to when it joined the WTO. 

For market reforms in China to continue, it will take constant vigilance from all countries and businesses around the world that benefit from rules-based trading. 

It will also require vigilance from Chinese business and government leaders, who themselves have a strong stake in ensuring that China is friendly to global innovation and international competition.  

The Chinese economy continues to move up the economic value chain, where growth is created not just by the power of a country’s industrial might, but also by the power of its people’s ideas and their inventions.  

In the long run, economies with poor intellectual property protections and inconsistent application of market opening commitments will see one of two things happen:

Either its people will lose the incentive to innovate, or they’ll do that innovating somewhere else.

That does not need to happen.  If China becomes more proactive in instituting market reforms, it will help unleash the innovation that will be necessary to grow the Chinese economy, and provide jobs for hundreds of millions of that country's citizens in the years ahead.

The United States and its companies stand ready to help China in its ambitious development goals. 

Our companies have a lot to offer, and so long as China moves steadily down the road towards reform, there is almost boundless potential for this partnership.

With that, I’m ready to take some questions from Al.