Thank you, Chairman Levin, and Ranking Member 
Herger and Members of the Subcommittee, for inviting me to 
appear before you today to discuss the Administration's views 
on the legislative proposals relating to trade with the 
People's Republic of China.
    Our trading relationship with China in general is a 
positive one with important benefits to the U.S. economy. 
However, at the same time we recognize that U.S. companies face 
a number of challenges as they try to compete in the China 
market, as well as with Chinese companies in the U.S. and with 
other markets. These challenges include market barriers, 
intellectual property issues and unfair trade practices.
    The Administration is strongly committed to free trade and 
to securing the benefits of open markets around the world, 
which is why we are firmly committed to ensuring that such 
trade be conducted according to international norms of fair 
trade, and be as free as possible from government intervention 
and distortion. We understand and support the proposition that 
maintaining public support for open trade means preserving the 
ability of the United States to enforce rigorously our trade 
remedy laws.
    The U.S. clearly derives benefits from trading with China. 
It is our fastest-growing market, and now our fourth largest 
overall export market. U.S. exports to China totaled $55 
billion in 2006, up 32 percent from the previous year. To put 
this in perspective, U.S. exports to China were greater than 
U.S. exports to India, Brazil and France combined. According to 
U.S. surveys, U.S. companies in China are generally successful 
and report solid sales in the China market, and our companies 
and consumers derive benefits from imports from China as well.
    The benefits derived by the United States trade with China 
are bolstered by a framework that requires China to abide by 
its international obligations. For the last 35 years, it has 
been the policy of the United States to engage China as it 
moves toward market economics. This policy culminated with 
China's accession to the WTO in 2001, so that China now has 
both rights and responsibilities that come with Membership in 
the international trading system.
    But as China's economy has evolved over the years, so has 
the range of tools available to make sure that China abides by 
these rights and responsibilities. Earlier this year Commerce 
preliminarily modified a 23-year-old government policy by 
applying the antisubsidy law to China. From 1984 until March of 
this year, Commerce had a practice of not applying the CVD law 
to the nonmarket economy countries, including China, and the 
antidumping law was a commonly used instrument to address 
unfair trade practices on the part of Chinese exporters and 
producers.
    In our countervailing duty investigation on glossy paper 
from China, Commerce preliminarily determined on March 30 that 
the current nature of China's economy does not create the 
obstacles to applying the antisubsidy law that were present in 
the mid-eighties in the Soviet-style economies at issue 20 
years ago. China of 2007 is not the Soviet bloc 1984. There is 
no legal bar to Commerce's application of the CVD law to 
nonmarket economies, including China. In the case of China, we 
will continue to investigate properly alleged subsidy 
allegations and will countervail subsidies when there is 
sufficient evidence that warrants application of the law.
    Indeed, I was just in China 2 weeks ago for an on-the-
ground investigation of subsidies to China's paper industry. 
Additionally, my agency is now investigating subsidies to 
several industries, including steel and tires. Our CVD 
investigations are among the most transparent in the world, and 
all interested parties will have ample opportunity to provide 
comments for the record in each of these ongoing proceedings. 
We will make our final determination in the glossy paper case 
in October.
    Our preliminary decision to apply the countervailing duty 
law to China in no way reverses our decision, reaffirmed last 
August in the context of an antidumping investigation, to treat 
China as a nonmarket economy under our antidumping law.
    The Department of Commerce is committed to identifying and 
addressing trade-distortive and injurious subsidies in all 
countries, including China. It is a top priority for us. 
Commerce has always maintained, and we believe the courts have 
agreed with us, that we have the statutory authority to apply 
the CVD law to NME countries. However, if Congress would like 
to affirm Congress' authority, we would welcome the opportunity 
to work with you, Mr. Chairman, and with this Committee.
    I should note that because of the complexity of this issue, 
it is important for the language of any bill to be crafted with 
appropriate precision not only to ensure consistency with our 
international obligations, but also to avoid unintended 
consequences for existing provisions of U.S. CVD and 
antidumping law.
    Beyond that issue I must make clear that the Department of 
Commerce is deeply concerned that the other legislative 
proposals that have been advanced to date raise serious issues 
under the international trade remedy rules and could invite WTO 
sanction retaliation against U.S. goods and services, as well 
as foreign mirror legislation, and trigger a global cycle of 
protectionist legislation.
    Before concluding, please allow me to comment on one other 
important issue that is under review in today's hearing, the 
question of whether dump sales should be offset by nondump 
sales in an antidumping analysis; zeroing. It is an extremely 
important issue, and the Administration finds the WTO appellate 
body's rulings on zeroing to be very troubling. However, we 
place significant importance on respecting the dispute 
settlement system and addressing these findings whether we 
agree with them or not through the appropriate mechanisms. We 
are committed to consulting closely with Congress as to the 
appropriate way to move forward in response to the appellate 
body's findings on zeroing. We will continue to use the rules 
negotiations in the WTO as a form to educate other WTO Members 
on the troubling implications of the appellate body's findings, 
particularly with respect to their own antidumping systems. We 
firmly believe that the zeroing issue is one that must be 
addressed through negotiation, and we will continue to work 
closely with USTR on such efforts.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to 
testify, and I am happy to take any questions.

Thank you Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Herger, and Members of the Subcommittee for inviting me to appear before you today to discuss the Administration's views on the legislative proposals relating to trade with the People's Republic of China.
Our trading relationship with China in general is a positive one, with important benefits to the U.S. economy. However, at the same time, we recognize that U.S. companies face a number of challenges as they try to compete in the China market, as well as with Chinese companies in the U.S. and other markets. These challenges include market barriers, intellectual property issues, and unfair trade practices. The Administration is strongly committed to free trade and to securing the benefits of open markets around the world, which is why we are firmly committed to ensuring that such trade be conducted according to international norms of fair trade and be as free as possible from government intervention and distortion. We understand and support the proposition that maintaining public support for open trade means preserving the ability of the United States to enforce rigorously our trade remedy laws.
The U.S. clearly benefits from trading with China; it is our fastest-growing market and is now our fourth-largest export market. U.S. exports to China totaled $55 billion in 2006, up 32 percent from the previous year. To put this in perspective, U.S. exports to China were greater than U.S. exports to India, Brazil, and France combined. According to industry surveys, U.S. companies in China are generally successful and report solid sales in the China market. And, our companies and consumers derive benefits from imports from China as well.
The benefits derived by the United States' trade with China are bolstered by a framework that requires China to abide by its international obligations. For the last 35 years, it has been the policy of the United States to engage China as it moves toward market economics. This policy culminated with China's accession to the WTO in 2001, so that China now has both the rights and responsibilities that come with membership in the international trading system.
Just as China's economy has evolved over the years, so has the range of tools available to make sure that China abides by these rights and responsibilities. Earlier this year, Commerce preliminarily modified a 23-year-old government policy by applying the anti-subsidy law to China. The basis for the recently reversed policy was the 1984 Georgetown Steel decision, in which the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed that the Department of Commerce has the discretion to decide whether to apply the countervailing duty law to non-market economy countries. In the circumstances presented by that case, though, Commerce reasoned that non-market economy firms were not independent, profit-driven allocators of resources and, therefore, could not take into account the impact of government subsidies when making pricing decisions. From then until March of this year, Commerce had a practice of not applying the CVD law to NME countries, including China, and the antidumping law was a commonly used instrument to address unfair trade practices on the part of Chinese producers and exporters. We currently have 62 antidumping orders against China. Since 2001, we have issued 31 antidumping orders against China, compared to the 24 orders put into place between 1993 and 2000.
In our countervailing duty investigation of coated free sheet paper from China, initiated on November 20, 2006, Commerce preliminarily determined on March 30, 2007, that the current nature of China's economy does not create the obstacles to applying the anti-subsidy law that were present in the "Soviet-style economies" at issue when we originally developed our policy more than 20 years ago. China of 2007 is not the Soviet Bloc of 1984. There is no legal bar to Commerce's application of the CVD law to non-market economies, including China. In the case of China, we will continue to investigate properly alleged subsidy allegations and will countervail subsidies where there is sufficient evidence that warrants such application.
Indeed, I was just in China two weeks ago for an on-the-ground investigation of subsidies to China's paper industry. Additionally, my agency is now investigating subsidies to several industries, including steel and tires. Our CVD investigations are among the most transparent in the world and all interested parties will have ample opportunity to provide comments for the record in each of these ongoing subsidies proceedings. Commerce will make its final determination in the glossy paper case in October.
Our preliminary decision to apply the countervailing duty law to China in no way reverses our decision, reaffirmed last August in the context of the antidumping investigation of imports of lined paper from China, to treat China as a non-market economy country under the antidumping law.
The Department of Commerce is committed to identifying and addressing trade-distortive and injurious subsidies in all countries, including China. That is a top priority for us. Commerce has always maintained, and we believe the courts have agreed with us, that we have the statutory authority to apply the CVD law to NME countries. However, if Congress would like to affirm Commerce's authority, we would welcome the opportunity to work with you, Mr. Chairman, and with this Committee. I should note that, because of the complexity of this issue, it is important for the language of any bill to be crafted with appropriate precision, not only to ensure consistency with our international trade obligations but also to avoid unintended consequences for existing provisions of U.S. countervailing and antidumping duty laws. Beyond that issue, I must make clear that the Department of Commerce is deeply concerned that the other legislative proposals that have been advanced to date raise serious concerns under international trade remedy rules and could invite WTO-sanctioned retaliation against U.S. goods and services, as well as foreign "mirror legislation" and trigger a global cycle of protectionist legislation.

Before concluding, please allow me to comment on another important issue that is under review in today's hearing – the question of whether dumped sales should be offset by non-dumped sales in an antidumping analysis. This issue, also known as "zeroing," is an extremely important issue, and the Administration finds that the WTO Appellate Body's findings on zeroing are very troubling. However, we place significant importance on respecting the dispute settlement system and addressing the findings, whether we agree with them or not, through the appropriate mechanisms. We are committed to consulting closely with Congress as to the appropriate way to move forward in response to the Appellate Body's findings on zeroing. We will continue to use the Rules negotiations as a forum to educate other WTO Members on the troubling implications of the Appellate Body's findings, particularly with respect to their own antidumping systems. We firmly believe that this zeroing issue is one that must be addressed through negotiation, and we will continue to work closely with USTR on such efforts.
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to testify. I am happy to take your questions.
