Chairman Hatch, Ranking Member Wyden, and 
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me here today 
to discuss the actions we have taken to assure the continued 
viability of our important steel and aluminum industries.
    The reports I have submitted to the President this past 
January pursuant to section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 
1962 found that steel and aluminum imports threaten to impair 
our national security. The President determined that tariffs 
are the necessary means to address these threats. As a result, 
the President signed proclamations on March 8th imposing a 25-
percent tariff on steel imports and a 10-percent tariff on 
aluminum imports.
    The tariff actions taken by the President are necessary to 
revive America's essential steel and aluminum industries. They 
have been harmed by imports to the point that allowing imports 
to continue unchecked threatens to impair our national 
security.
    The tariffs on steel and aluminum are anticipated to reduce 
imports to levels needed for these industries to achieve long-
term viability.
    In the short term, since the imposition of the section 232 
tariffs, industry already has started taking actions to restart 
idled facilities. Idled steel and aluminum capacity is being 
restarted as we sit here, in Illinois, Ohio, South Carolina, 
Missouri, and Kentucky. Several other companies have also 
announced new investments in these industries in Oklahoma, 
Florida, Missouri, and Texas.
    In addition, the President authorized the establishment of 
a mechanism for U.S. parties to apply for exclusions from the 
tariff for specific products based on demand that is unmet by 
domestic production or for specific national security 
considerations.
    Today we are announcing our first determinations on 98 
exclusion requests for steel products, granting 42 and denying 
56. Commerce has received more than 20,000 steel and aluminum 
exclusion requests, including resubmissions, and has posted 
more than 9,200 for public review and comment.
    Commerce also has received more than 2,300 objections to 
exclusion requests. Review of exclusion requests and related 
objections is being conducted, as it must be, on a case-by-case 
basis. But we have made some major changes in reforming and 
improving the process. And I will describe a couple now.
    First of all, we will be accelerating the processing of 
exclusion requests by immediately granting those which are 
correctly submitted in full, to which no objections have been 
received during the public comment period.
    Commerce is making an unprecedented effort to process the 
requests expeditiously. We also are developing a list of 
downstream products that have been hurt by imports since the 
tariffs have been imposed. And we are incorporating as many of 
these as are logical to the list we are recommending for 
inclusion in the 301 tariff listing of $200 billion that will 
be released shortly. We have already found some 50 products 
that will be included in that list.
    The public comment period on the interim final rule for 
these decisions ended on May 18th, and we are reviewing the 
comments received to assess whether any further revisions to 
the process are necessary.
    Finally, on May 23rd, after a conversation with the 
President, I initiated a proceeding under section 232 to 
determine whether imports of automobiles and automotive parts 
into the United States threaten to impair the national 
security. This investigation will examine the United States' 
production capabilities and the technologies needed for 
projected national defense requirements, as well as the adverse 
effects of foreign competition on our internal economy.
    In conclusion, this administration is standing up for 
American families, American businesses, and American workers by 
taking action to reduce imports that threaten our national 
security.
    I thank you, and I look forward to answering questions from 
the members of the committee.

The reports that I submitted to the President in January pursuant 
to section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 found that steel and 
aluminum imports threaten to impair our national security. The 
President determined that tariffs are necessary to address this threat. 
As a result, the President signed proclamations on March 8th imposing a 
25-percent tariff on steel imports and a 10-percent tariff on aluminum 
imports. The President subsequently signed additional proclamations on 
March 22nd, April 30th, and May 31st, and modified the tariffs with 
respect to steel imports from Australia, Argentina, Brazil, and South 
Korea, and aluminum imports from Australia and Argentina. The 
President's section 232 decisions are the result of a robust and 
thorough interagency review coordinated by the White House.

    The tariff actions taken by the President are necessary to protect 
America's essential steel and aluminum industries, which have been 
harmed by the quantities and circumstances of imports to the point that 
allowing imports to continue unchecked threatens to impair our national 
security. These imports stem from a variety of reasons, including 
industrial export policies of our trading partners, unfair trade 
practices, and massive global excess production, particularly by China.

    I initiated the steel and aluminum section 232 investigations in 
April 2017, and the President signed two memoranda that month directing 
me to proceed expeditiously to conduct these investigations and report 
my findings. The Department provided a 30-day public comment period and 
held three days of hearings. Section 232 investigations include 
consideration of: domestic production needed for projected national 
defense requirements; domestic industry's capacity to meet those 
requirements; the existing and anticipated availabilities of human 
resources, products, raw materials, production equipment and 
facilities, and other supplies and services essential to the national 
defense; the growth requirements of domestic industries to meet 
national defense requirements and the supplies and services, including 
the investment, exploration and development necessary to assure such 
growth; the impact of foreign competition on the economic welfare of 
individual domestic industries; and any substantial unemployment, 
decrease in revenues of government, loss of skills or investment, or 
other serious effects resulting from the displacement of domestic 
products by excessive imports, without excluding other factors, in 
determining whether such weakening of our internal economy may impair 
the national security.

    We concluded that steel import levels and global excess capacity 
are weakening our domestic economy and therefore threaten to impair our 
national security. The level of foreign steel imports has been greater 
than 30 percent for the past four years and threatens to impair the 
national security by displacing domestic production. Six basic oxygen 
furnaces and four electric arc furnaces had closed since 2000 and 
employment has dropped 35 percent since 1998. Global excess capacity 
will cause U.S. producers to face more and more competition from 
foreign imports as other countries increase their exports to further 
their own economic objectives. China is by far the largest producer and 
exporter of steel, and the largest source of excess steel capacity. 
China's excess capacity alone exceeds the total U.S. steel-making 
capacity by at least three times. Even more importantly, China exported 
40 percent more steel than the U.S. produced in 2015 and 36 percent 
more in 2016. In 2017 China reduced its exports, but still exported an 
amount of steel equal to 90 percent of total U.S. production.

    We also concluded that the quantities and circumstances of aluminum 
imports are weakening our economy and threaten to impair national 
security. Rising levels of foreign imports put domestic producers at 
risk of losing the capacity to produce aluminum needed to support 
critical infrastructure and national defense. Aluminum imports had 
risen to 90 percent of total domestic demand for primary aluminum, up 
from 66 percent in 2012. From 2013-2016, aluminum industry employment 
fell by 58 percent, six smelters shut down, and only two of the 
remaining five smelters are operating at capacity, even though demand 
has grown considerably. The report found that excess production and 
capacity, particularly in China, has been a major factor in the decline 
of domestic aluminum production. We concluded that if no action were 
taken, the United States could be in danger of losing the capability to 
smelt primary aluminum altogether.

    The tariffs on steel and aluminum are anticipated to reduce imports 
to levels needed for these industries, in combination with good 
management, to achieve long-term viability. As a result, these 
industries will be able to re-open closed mills, sustain a skilled 
workforce, invest in needed research and development, and maintain or 
increase production. The strengthening of our domestic steel and 
aluminum industries will reduce our reliance on foreign producers. It 
will take time for U.S. steel and aluminum producers to fully restart 
idled capacity and regain long-term financial health.

    However, industry has started taking actions to restart idled 
capacity:

          U.S. Steel is restarting two steel blast furnaces in Granite 
        City, IL, adding approximately 2.5 million metric tons of steel 
        capacity available for U.S. consumers.
          Republic Steel is restarting an idled steel electric arc 
        furnace in Lorain, OH.
          Liberty Steel is reopening its wire rod coil steel facility 
        in Georgetown, SC.
          Magnitude 7 Metals is restarting 236,000 metric tons of 
        aluminum production in Marston, MO.
          Century Aluminum is investing $100 million dollars to 
        restart and modernize its high purity aluminum smelter in 
        Hawesville, KY.
          India's JSW Steel Limited announced in March 2018 that it 
        paid nearly $81 million to acquire the Acero Junction facility 
        near Steubenville, OH.

    The United States is not the only country that has expressed 
concern about the types of unfair trade practices and excess capacity 
that are prevalent in the steel and aluminum industries. Countries like 
China have provided massive subsidies to their companies, and this is 
harming markets worldwide. Recognizing our shared concern about global 
excess capacity, the President's proclamations announcing these actions 
welcomed any country with which we have a security relationship to 
discuss alternate ways to address the threatened impairment of the 
national security caused by imports from that country.

    In addition, the President authorized the establishment of a 
mechanism for U.S. parties to apply for exclusions from the applicable 
tariff for specific products based on demand that is unmet by domestic 
production or for specific national security considerations. This 
process is being managed by the Commerce Department in consultation 
with other Federal agencies. We published an interim final rule in the 
Federal Register on March 19 establishing the procedures for the 
exclusion process.

    Today, we are announcing our first determinations on 98 exclusion 
requests for steel products, granting 42 requests and denying 56. 
Commerce has received more than 20,000 steel and aluminum exclusion 
requests (including resubmissions) and has posted more than 9,200 for 
public review and comment. Commerce has also received more than 2,300 
objections to exclusion requests. Review of exclusion requests and 
related objections is being conducted on a case-by-case basis in a fair 
and transparent process. Commerce is making an unprecedented effort to 
process the requests expeditiously. The public comment period on the 
interim final rule ended on May 18th, and we are reviewing the comments 
received to assess whether any revisions to the process are necessary.

    On May 23rd, I also initiated an investigation under section 232 to 
determine whether imports of automobiles and automotive parts into the 
United States threaten to impair the national security. Automobile 
manufacturing has long been a significant source of American 
technological innovation. This investigation will examine the United 
States' production capabilities and technologies needed for projected 
national defense requirements and the adverse effects of foreign 
competition on our internal economy. As with the steel and aluminum 
investigations, there is a transparent notice and comment period: a 
Federal Register notice was issued on May 30th inviting public 
comments, which are due by June 22nd. Public hearings on the 
investigation will be held on July 19th and 20th.

    This administration is standing up for American families, American 
businesses, and American workers by taking action to reduce imports 
that threaten our national security.

    Thank you for allowing me to testify on this important matter, and 
I look forward to answering questions from members of the committee.
