
    Mr. Krach. Great. Well, thank you, Chairman Sullivan and 
Ranking Member----
    Senator Sullivan. You need to turn your mic on.
    Mr. Krach. Thank you, Chairman Sullivan and Ranking Member 
Markey and Members of the Subcommittee on Security. I 
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the China Challenge 
because it's at the epicenter of the economic security threat 
landscape.
    Last week in his landmark speech, Secretary Pompeo said, 
``Today, we are sitting wearing our masks and watching the 
pandemic's body count rise, reading new headlines every day of 
repression in Hong Kong and Xinjiang, seeing staggering 
statistics of Chinese trade abuses, watching the Chinese 
military grow stronger on the back of stolen American clean 
innovation.''
    I've experienced the CCP's economic warfare firsthand. I 
grew up in small town Ohio where my father ran a five-person 
machine shop and I saw China wield its weapons of mass 
production gutting my father's shop. His pain was not lost on 
me.
    I went on to be a Vice President of General Motors where I 
learned when you build a plant in China, you get access to 
their market. You don't just give them the blueprints, you give 
them the process engineering and train their labor force.
    I spent the rest of my career in Silicon Valley where I had 
my intellectual property ripped off and I saw firsthand China's 
strategy of seducing with money while reinforcing with 
intimidation and retaliation.
    I started the world's first B2B commerce company called 
Ariba. It's now the largest. Seven trillion of commerce was 
conducted over the Ariba network last year, and I remember in 
the late 1990s we welcomed Chinese visitors to our headquarters 
only to have them clone one of our concepts. That company was 
Ali Baba.
    A couple of years ago, while running DocuSign, I spent two 
weeks in China exploring what I thought might be market 
opportunities. I've been going there since 1981, but this time 
it was different. I met with Politburo members who spoke so 
passionately about their grand strategy for global domination 
and I saw how cleverly they depositioned the United States.
    Then I got an in-depth look at their technology. That's 
when it hit me. As soon as I got back, I went to Washington and 
spoke to anyone who would listen and asked, ``do you understand 
the country with the best technology usually wins?'' And that's 
when I was asked to serve and that's why I'm here today because 
of the China Challenge.
    My first week on the job, Secretary Pompeo gave me the 
charge to develop and operationalize a global strategic plan 
that maximized national security, combats Chinese economic 
aggression.
    The strategy we've developed consists of three pillars. The 
first is to turbo-charge economic impediments by driving 
productivity and prioritizing 10 emerging technology key areas 
that are critical to economic growth and security, such as 5G 
and semi-conductors.
    China is also gunning for the lead in each of these as we 
speak. I can tell you the Communist Party's biggest fear is the 
United States would have a Sputnik moment.
    The second pillar of the strategy is safeguarding America's 
assets, including our intellectual property, financial system, 
and core freedoms. Securing these will require the U.S. and 
partners to demand reciprocity, transparency, and enforcement 
of laws.
    We must also understand they've used our assets against us, 
including our openness and our values. We must view every 
Chinese action with skepticism. As Secretary Pompeo recently 
said, ``Distrust and verify.''
    The next part of the plan turns the table on the CCP by 
reclaiming our core freedoms as our strength. We will answer 
Secretary Pompeo's call to build a new alliance of democracies 
to oppose China.
    We would envision this to be comprised of like-minded 
countries, companies, and civil society that operate under a 
set of trust principles for all areas of economic collaboration 
and those trust principles are American values, things like 
integrity, accountability, transparency, reciprocity, respect 
for Rule of Law, respect for property of all kinds, respect for 
sovereignty of nations, respect for the planet, respect for 
human rights.
    When I talk to my counterparts from other countries about 
this concept, their reaction is it's about time. We've been 
waiting for an alternative, as one of the Southeast Asian 
nations said, to China's One Belt One-Way Toll Road to Beijing.
    The new alliance of democracies represents a unifying and 
equitable clean alternative.
    Speaking of the clean, let me update you on the State 
Department's Clean Campaign which is unlocking a global 
movement.
    Secretary Pompeo also said last week, ``We've urged 
countries to become clean countries so that their citizens' 
private information doesn't end up in the hands of the Chinese 
Communist Party,'' and it starts with the 5G Clean Network.
    For years, the CCP has strong-armed nations to purchase 
Huawei's 5G infrastructure. Huawei is the backbone of CCP's 
surveillance state and extends the great one-way China firewall 
where data comes in but not out and reciprocally propaganda 
goes out but the truth does not come in.
    The State Department is leading by example through our 5G 
Clean Path Initiative which requires all data entering or 
exiting U.S. diplomatic facilities to transit only across 
trusted equipment.
    We're making a difference and encouraging our partners to 
join the 5G Clean Path and turning the tide against Huawei and 
toward clean vendors.
    As a result, Huawei's deals are evaporating. You saw it 
earlier this month with the U.K. and last week with France. 
There are now about 35G clean countries and many of the most 
largest telco companies have become clean telcos, also 
recently, Telco Italia, Telefonica, the top three telcos in 
Singapore, and the top three telcos in Canada.
    So the Clean Campaign's been so successful that we're 
preparing to expand it beyond just clean networks and to clean 
systems, including clean apps, clean store, clean cloud, clean 
cable, and even clean currency.
    It's also important to have clean supply chains with clean 
labor. Recently, the State Department joined other agencies to 
issue a business advisory regarding supply chain exposure to 
entities engaged in forced labor and other human rights abuses 
in Zhing Zhang.
    As I said in a follow up letter to all U.S. CEOs and their 
boards, I said, ``Your institutions have a moral 
responsibility, perhaps a fiduciary duty, to establish clean 
governance principles and divest from companies that contribute 
to human rights abuses.'' They should at a minimum disclose the 
Chinese companies they invest in.
    Soon, President Trump's Working Group on Financial Markets 
will make recommendations to the President on the transparency 
of Chinese public companies to enhance investor protections and 
ensure American exchanges remain the gold standard for the 
world.
    So, Senators, in conclusion, tackling the many facets of 
the Chinese Challenge require all three branches of the 
government, our powerful private sector, and as Secretary 
Pompeo said, ``A new alliance of democracies.'' America's 
moment is now to choose a path, a clean path to the future for 
the sake of our children and our grandchildren.
    Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Krach follows:]

 Prepared Statement of Hon. Keith Krach, U.S. Under Secretary of State 
 for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment, U.S. Department of 
                                 State
Introduction
    Good afternoon Chairman Sullivan, Ranking Member Markey, and other 
esteemed Members of the Subcommittee on Security. It is a pleasure to 
be here with you today and I very much appreciate the opportunity to 
discuss the State Department's role in addressing economic security. 
Now more than ever, as we live through this time of incredible 
uncertainty, the economic security challenges facing our Nation are 
acute and worthy of a robust, whole-of-government response. The China 
challenge sits at the epicenter of the economic security threat 
landscape.
    On July 23, in a landmark speech at the Nixon Library, Secretary 
Pompeo delivered a summary indictment of the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP). As he said, ``Today we sit wearing masks and watching the 
pandemic's body count rise, reading new headlines every day of 
repression in Hong Kong and Xinjiang, seeing staggering statistics of 
Chinese trade abuses, watching the Chinese military grow stronger on 
the back of stolen American innovation.''
    I have experienced the long reach of Beijing firsthand, starting 
when I was growing up in small-town Ohio, where my father ran a machine 
shop. My dad's customers were suppliers to the big three car companies 
in Detroit, and his fortunes were tied to theirs. As China offered 
cheap and subsidized labor--its ``weapons of mass production''--
manufacturing was shipped overseas, and many of my dad's orders dried 
up. I saw him go through the agonizing process of laying off trusted 
employees. His pain was not lost on me.
    I went on to be a vice president of General Motors, where I saw the 
same story play out from a different angle. I saw the lust over China's 
cheap manufacturing capabilities. And I saw the fallout: When you build 
a plant in China, you don't just give them your blueprints, you give 
them the process and engineering skills they need to steal your design 
and create it for themselves.
    I spent the rest of my career in Silicon Valley, where I went on to 
start the world's first business-to-business e-commerce company called 
Ariba in 1996. We took it public and $7 trillion of commerce was 
conducted over the Ariba network last year. In 2009, I became CEO and 
Chairman at a 50-person company called DocuSign that had a simple dream 
of automating the signature process. After recently completing 10 years 
there, it is now a $40 billion public company and recognized worldwide 
for its transformative impact on the way business is done.
    But in Silicon Valley, the CCP's economic weapons were aimed right 
at us: including widespread theft of intellectual property and 
predatory joint ventures. Two years ago, I traveled to China to explore 
market opportunities. I heard five of the top seven Politburo members 
speak about China's plans for the future, and I saw their technology. 
As soon as I came back stateside, I went to Washington and spoke to 
anyone who would listen. I said, ``Do you understand that the country 
that has the best technology usually wins?'' And that's when I was 
asked to serve. It has been the privilege of my life.
    During my confirmation hearing, I stated that ``I fully appreciate 
the enormity and gravity of this role, especially in a time where the 
reality we face as a nation is one of ever-increasing cyber warfare and 
seemingly ceaseless variations of intense, perhaps even weaponized, 
economic competition.''
    I also said, ``It is comforting to know that both sides of the 
aisle understand that China is playing the long game, and they are 
playing for keeps--a four-dimensional game of economic, military, 
diplomatic, and cultural chess with little respect for human rights, 
intellectual property, rule of law, transparency, the environment, or 
the sovereignty of other nations.''
    During the hearing, when asked how I would accomplish my 
objectives, I said ``my focus would be on embracing this opportunity 
and harnessing three powerful areas of competitive advantage: 
strengthening our partnerships with friends and allies, leveraging the 
innovation and resources of the private sector, and amplifying the 
moral high ground of our American values and enduring optimism to 
advance peace and prosperity for our country and for the world.''
    My life's work has been focused on creating innovative companies 
and transformative social causes by building high-performance teams 
that challenge the status quo. I believe the team with the best people 
wins and that diversity of thought on any team is the catalyst for 
genius.
Framing Global Economic Security
    My charge at the State Department, which Secretary Pompeo gave me 
in my first week, is to develop and operationalize a framework for 
global economic security combats the PRC's economic aggression, drives 
economic growth, maximizes national security, and advances peace and 
prosperity. It's been my honor to work with many in Congress to shape 
this strategy.
    As the President has often stated, economic security is national 
security. We live in a world of determined competitors, asymmetric 
threats, and networked technology. I have heard the same sentiment from 
Congress and leaders in the private sector. Most importantly, I hear it 
from my international counterparts.
    Last year, Congress passed the bipartisan Championing American 
Business Through Diplomacy Act, which bolsters U.S. business 
competitiveness abroad. It does so by empowering the Department of 
State to now work alongside the Department of Commerce to coordinate 
interagency efforts to leverage our diplomatic missions to promote U.S. 
economic and business around the world. The bill is aimed at countering 
China's economic aggression by promoting U.S. business values that 
reflect high quality standards, transparency, and agility in adapting 
to the unique demands of individual foreign markets.
    Adveraries and strategic competitors, such as China, are targeting 
our national assets with a range of malign practices including theft, 
deception, unfair trade practices, intimidation, financial seduction, 
frivolous litigation, cyberattack, forced technology transfer, 
propaganda, corruption, coercion, and retaliation. Securing America's 
assets requires the U.S. private and public sectors to continue to work 
with like-minded nations and demand reciprocity, transparency, and 
solidarity.
    We must continue to work with allies and friends to halt China's 
aggression. It's about viewing every PRC action, whether an investment 
in an American firm or the opening of a new Confucius Center at an 
American university, with appropriate skepticism. As Secretary Pompeo 
noted in July, President Reagan's Cold War mantra of ``trust but 
verify'' doesn't apply here. When it comes to the CCP, we must 
``distrust and verify.''
    Our strategy for advancing global economic security and combating 
China's economic aggression has yielded results. To give you a sampling 
of the breadth and the depth of our efforts, I am highlighting our work 
in the following six areas: 5G, semiconductors, supply chains, 
institutions of higher learning, the One Belt One Road, and the 
environment.
5G Networks
    5G and 6G will be cornerstones of our economies and societies in 
the future. Many aspects of our lives will flow over these networks, 
which is why it is critical to secure them--and why the design, 
development, and control of such technology, in the wrong hands, they 
can be incredibly dangerous.
    The CCP is posturing to leverage 5G-enabled technology to create 
and export George Orwell's version of ``1984'' into the 21st century, 
with an all-encompassing web technologies that can be exploited for 
information gathering and surveillance. Huawei is the backbone of the 
CCP's surveillance state and extends the great one-way China firewall, 
where data comes in but not out and, reciprocally, propaganda goes out, 
but the truth doesn't come in.
    For years, the CCP has strong-armed nations to purchase Huawei's 5G 
infrastructure and services. Untrusted, high-risk vendors like Huawei 
and ZTE provide the CCP's authoritarian government the capability to 
weaponize critical applications, information, and infrastructure, and 
to provide technological advances to China's military forces. Huawei is 
also on the Commerce Department's Entity List for engaging in 
activities contrary to the national security and foreign policy 
interests of the United States.
    It should surprise no one that Huawei is under indictment in the 
United States for bank fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy, violating 
sanctions, racketeering, and misappropriating intellectual property 
from six U.S. tech companies. And we know that it deploys these same 
tactics in Europe and wherever else it can get a foothold.
    To turn the tide, on April 29, 2020, Secretary Pompeo announced 
that, in response to requirements in Section 889 of the 2019 National 
Defense Authorization Act, the State Department will require a Clean 
Path for all standalone 5G network traffic entering and exiting U.S. 
diplomatic facilities at home and abroad. 5G Clean Path is an end-to-
end communications path for our diplomatic facilities that does not use 
any transmission, control, computing, or storage equipment from 
untrusted vendors. The Department of State has asked other countries to 
join us in requiring a 5G clean path for their overseas diplomatic 
facilities.
    Further, we our working to infom international partners and allies 
on the risk posed by untrusted information and communications 
technology and services (ICTS), and convince them to join our effort to 
address these risks through collaborative action. To that end, we 
conducting international outreach, describing existing U.S. actions and 
efforts, and encouraging foreign partners to take similar actions to 
secure their ICTS ecosystem, while maintaining an open and fair market 
for products and services from U.S. and trusworhty international 
technology vendors.
Semiconductors
    In the face of a newly aggressive and technologically empowered 
China, the United States urgently needs similar success in 
semiconductors. A recent onshoring win of TSMC was a good first step 
for us, but there's more work to be done.
    Semiconductors enable thousands of products and functions--from 
cell phones to automobiles to 5G to artificial intelligence, along with 
a litany of activities crucial to our national security. American 
companies invented semiconductor technology and are leaders in its 
design and development and are still global leaders in this area, yet 
our output lags behind China, Taiwan, and South Korea, in semiconductor 
manufacturing. We now produce only 12 percent of the world's chips, 
half of our share of 24 percent in 2000. China now produces 19 percent 
of global output, up from only 2 percent in 2000.
    China shows no signs of stopping its pursuit of this economic and 
national security imperative. China's intentions of technological 
supremacy are documented in its Made in China 2025 plan: It's using all 
of its tools of national power--including below-market lending and 
equity, direct grants, tax concessions, and industrial and scientific 
espionage--to dominate this critical global industry. It has already 
invested $60 billion to develop an indigenous semiconductor industry, 
with plans to invest another $100 billion over the next 10 years.
    Chinese leaders understand that, as steam and steel were the 
guarantors of economic and military strength in the 19th century and 
the atom in the 20th, so will silicon be in the 21st. They understand 
that a country that can't produce its own semiconductors can't defend 
itself. And that is precisely the risk to the United States if our 
technological dominance is eclipsed by Communist China. Further, as we 
learned from recent shortages in the wake of COVID-19, there are risks 
to relying on supply chains for critical products that are largely 
manufactured in one country.
    That's why we worked to secure a new commitment from the world's 
leading semiconductor manufacturing companies to open the most advanced 
chip factory in the United States. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing 
Company (TSMC) which, along with Samsung, is one of only two companies 
capable of producing cutting-edge five-nanometer chips, has announced 
plans for a cutting-edge facility in Arizona.
    This facility will boost American competitiveness by ensuring that 
the United States will have the capability to produce the chips 
powering everything from 5G base stations to smart phones to F-35 
fighter jets. It will also create tens of thousands of new U.S. jobs, 
both in the semiconductor industry and throughout the high-tech supply 
chain.
    The TSMC plant is a tremendous step to jumpstart a new era of U.S. 
high tech leadership, but we must keep moving with speed and purpose to 
create a level playing field for American tech leadership to thrive.
    New Federal incentives should be made available to any company, 
domestic or foreign, that would undertake such a project anywhere in 
the United States.
    These initiatives will enable the United States to build 
semiconductor manufacturing capacity, and in turn generate a domestic 
supply chain for materials, equipment, parts, components, and services. 
For example, when TSMC completes the construction of its planned 
facility in Arizona, eight major suppliers plan to open new operations 
here. If other companies replicate TSMC's decision, it will create the 
ecosystem we need to maintain and grow our U.S. leadership in this 
critical sector.
    The U.S. commercial space industry has demonstrated that our Nation 
can overcome even the most daunting challenges. Success in 
semiconductors is measured in nanometers, not miles. By restoring 
America's rightful place in leading a semiconductor manufacturing 
capacity, we will create greater security and more jobs for our 
citizens. We will secure an American legacy of innovation that has made 
us the most prosperous nation in history.
Supply Chains
    In a recent letter to U.S. business leaders, I asked corporate 
boards to keep their supply chains clean from any of the human rights 
abuses in Xinjiang, including forced labor. We are asking financial 
institutions, pension funds, index funds, and university endowments to 
keep their investments clean and free from Chinese companies that 
violate human rights, profit from forced labor, build advanced 
weaponry, or contribute to the erosion of Hong Kong's autonomy and 
freedoms.
    Up to this point, the CCP has concealed the forced labor and other 
human rights abuses in Xinjiang and beyond that serve American 
companies all over China. What makes matters worse is that the average 
U.S. investor in companies that do business in China has been 
unknowingly supporting the CCP's authoritarian machine. And American 
technology has been transferred to, bought, or stolen by the CCP to 
create a dystopian surveillance state that history's most repressive 
dictators could have only dreamed of.
    Addressing these critical challenges starts with the most 
fundamental business principle: transparency is visibility, and 
visibility is accountability.
    To help shine the light of transparency, the State Department 
joined the Departments of the Treasury, Commerce, and Homeland Security 
on July 1 to issue a business advisory regarding potential supply chain 
exposure to entities engaged in forced labor and other human rights 
abuses in Xinjiang. This is a start, particularly when coupled with the 
addition to the Commerce Department's Entity List of 48 PRC 
institutions and financial sanctions on persons involved in human 
rights abuses.
    As I said in my follow up letter to CEOs all across our country, 
the boards of their institutions have a moral responsibility and 
perhaps even a fiduciary duty to ensure the institutions divest from 
companies that contribute to human rights abuses, and to establish 
governance principles that prevent these investments going forward. 
Pension funds, university endowments, mutual funds, insurance 
companies, venture capital firms, institutional investors, and 
particularly emerging index funds should, at a minimum, disclose to 
their constituents the Chinese companies they invest in.
    However, the biggest ``difference makers'' in ending human rights 
and labor abuses like the ones in Xinjiang are every day citizens. At 
the end of the day, the American people are accountable, and they have 
more power than they think. As my 94-year-old mother says, ``If it is 
to be, it is up to me.''
    How? If they have a pension plan, if their brokers invest in an 
emerging index fund, if their universities have an endowment fund, if 
they invest in a mutual fund, ETF, private equity or venture fund, 
every day Americans can ask these entities to disclose their Chinese 
investments. If not, they can ask to get a list of the Chinese 
companies they invest in. If these entities can't or won't provide the 
information, then investors should consider whether they are 
comfortable with this lack of information.
One Belt One Road
    As developing nations reel from the shock of the China-born 
pandemic, they are also coming to terms with another Chinese pandemic 
that can't be cured by a vaccine and will ravage developing nations for 
years: a rising wave of unsustainable debt owed to the PRC.
    For years, the PRC has couched its debt-financed One Belt One Road 
(OBOR) initiative in the language of cooperation, development, 
connectivity, and win-win. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
Follow the money, and you see that OBOR lending is part of the CCP's 
covert, corrupt, and coercive toolkit for pursuing its geostrategic 
interests.
    China has used this predatory OBOR lending in an attempt to 
dominate the Eurasian landmass in one massive supply network with China 
at its head, locking in global access to rare-earth minerals, critical 
materials, oil, natural gas, cotton, lumber, and other natural 
resources to feed their industrial-military machine.
    Almost all Chinese overseas lending is extended by the Chinese 
government and various state-owned entities, not by private banks. This 
makes China by far the world's largest official bilateral creditor, 
with outstanding claims in 2017 surpassing those of all 22 Paris Club 
governments combined.
    China frequently requires its sovereign loans be backed by 
collateral. Ecuador's billions in debt to China--comprising oil-backed 
and investment loans that the previous administration contracted in 
secret with PRC state-owned companies--are a classic example giving 
China the right to claim Ecuadorean state assets in the event of missed 
payments.
    For developing economies to rebuild in the wake of the pandemic, 
the carnage of Chinese debt must end. Therefore, to help the poorest 
countries respond to pandemic-related shocks, the G20 and Paris Club 
are freezing 2020 government loan payments under the Debt Service 
Suspension Initiative, which was developed by the G7 under the Treasury 
Department's leadership. While the Chinese government signed onto the 
initiative, it is excluding some claims of its largest government 
creditors, such as China EXIM and the China Development Bank, from the 
effort.
    The United States is calling on all Chinese creditor agencies to 
fully and transparently implement the G20-Paris Club Debt Service 
Suspension Initiative, waive nondisclosure clauses, and refrain from 
using them in the future. Just as important, we must join in calling on 
all citizens, companies, and countries of the world to object to the 
CCP's opaque predatory lending.
Protecting U.S. Higher Education
    During this unprecedented period in modern history, American 
universities and colleges are on the frontlines of addressing many of 
the challenges presented by the pandemic. At the same time, these great 
institutions are at the forefront of an equally serious challenge 
brought on by the authoritarian influence of the CCP described in this 
Letter that has broad implications for ensuring academic freedom, 
honoring human dignity, protecting university endowments, and 
safeguarding intellectual property.
    At the U.S. Department of State, one of our primary missions is to 
monitor and advocate for freedom, including academic freedom, around 
the world. American institutions of higher learning are the envy of the 
world and have always been an invaluable partner in that mission. That 
is especially true now as we join hands to work through myriad 
challenges brought on by the pandemic so that we can continue welcoming 
students from around the world to America's shores. This includes an 
orderly resumption of student visa issuances as the situation dictates 
at our embassies and consulates around the world.
    As a former Chairman of the Board of Purdue University, I recognize 
that when addressing a long-term strategic issue of this magnitude, the 
responsibility sits squarely on the shoulders of each and every board 
member. Our concern is with the malign actions of the CCP and specific 
individuals, not with the Chinese people or the overwhelming majority 
of Chinese students in the United States. Our goal is to see an 
improved, open, and transparent environment in which U.S. and Chinese 
scholars can engage with greater trust. We seek your assistance in an 
effort to safeguard U.S. technology and institutions, and to ensure our 
national and economic security remain safe and free from foreign 
interference.
    After spending many years leading public companies, I have learned 
that leadership in the face of challenges starts with that magical 
principle of transparency. Good leaders know that visibility is 
accountability. And this is where university and government leaders are 
partners once again.
    A number of American universities and colleges are home to 
Confucius Institutes, partially funded and controlled by the PRC. As 
the American Association of University Professors noted in a 2014 
report, ``Confucius Institutes function as an arm of the Chinese state 
and are allowed to ignore academic freedom.''
    While ostensibly intended to teach Americans about Chinese language 
and culture, they also exert malign influence on U.S. campuses and 
disseminate CCP propaganda. There is increasing evidence that Confucius 
Institutes spread PRC influence by providing institutions with 
financial incentives to abstain from criticizing PRC policies; putting 
pressure on faculty to self-censor; monitoring overseas students for 
loyalty to the party; and undermining freedom of expression by 
disrupting campus events deemed controversial to the CCP.
    CCP propaganda has also spread into our K-12 schools through the 
Confucius Classrooms program. Designed to provide Chinese language and 
cultural education, Confucius Classrooms teach PRC-approved curriculum 
to thousands of students across the United States.
    Our goal is to shine a light on Confucius Institutes programming, 
PRC citizen staffing, funding and operations. With this increased level 
of transparency, U.S. stakeholders, including universities andlocal 
school districts, can make more informed choices about the PRC 
influence exerted on their communities.
    Studies have shown that the majority of the U.S. university 
endowment fund portfolios include PRC stocks listed on American 
exchanges either directly or indirectly through emerging markets index 
funds.
    The U.S. academic community is in the crosshairs of not only 
foreign competitors contending for the best and brightest talent, but 
also our most valuable intellectual property. America built successful 
research universities on certain values: reciprocity, integrity, merit-
based competition, and transparency. These values foster a free 
exchange of ideas, encourage the most rigorous research results to 
flourish, and ensure that researchers receive the benefit of their 
intellectual property. In turn, America attracts the best and 
brightest.
    The PRC, however, seeks to exploit America's openness by 
implementing a well-financed, whole-of-government campaign to recruit 
foreign experts through its more than 200 talent recruitment plans. As 
of 2017, China reportedly has recruited 7,000 researchers who focus on 
or have access to cutting-edge research and technology. For the CCP, 
international scientific collaboration is not about advancing science, 
it is about advancing the PRC national security interests.
    Just as our fine institutions vet employees for scientific rigor or 
allegations of plagiarism, we also must vet for financial conflicts of 
interests and foreign sources of funding. If our researchers can assess 
potential collaborators' experience and past publications, they should 
also assess any government affiliations and ulterior motivations. My 
experience in the business, education, and government sectors tells me 
that there is tremendous power in uniting those sectors as a force for 
good if we are all armed with the truth. The world is watching, and the 
integrity of our democracy and educational institutions is in our 
hands.
China's Assault on the Environment
    The CCP's actions wreak havoc on the Earth's air, water, and land--
Beijing can and must change course, but only if the international 
community unifies in public pressure, rather than placating. The PRC 
claims to be a ``torchbearer'' on global environmental issues--but like 
so many of its claims, this is an outright lie. Beijing is the largest 
emitter of numerous pollutants and greenhouse gases and irresponsibly 
exploits natural resources for its own selfish and often pernicious 
ends.
    The PRC has been the largest emitter of carbon dioxide since 2006. 
Armies of Chinese workers move in to perform the work and leave a trail 
of environmental destruction in their wake.
    The PRC is also responsible for nearly 30 percent of the plastic 
pollution filling the world's oceans and harming marine life. 
Unfortunately, persistent PRC market barriers, including those related 
to protection of intellectual property, hamper trade in U.S. 
environmental technologies that could help China address this and other 
challenges.
    The PRC is one of the world's biggest offenders when it comes to 
illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing and overfishing 
agreed-upon limits--endangering species and devastating local 
economies. At the same time, the PRC is also the world's top subsidizer 
of fishing activities. With its own fisheries already depleted from 
overfishing, massive subsidies create incentives for the PRC's distant 
water fleet to plumb the high seas and other nations' waters. Just ask 
our friends in beautiful Ecuador, where waste from Chinese vessels is 
washing up on the shores of the Galapagos Islands, a World Heritage 
site, and important fish stocks are threatened. Beijing can and must 
stop its irresponsible fishing practices.
    The PRC manipulates Mekong River flows for its own profit at great 
cost to downstream nations. Through the Mekong Water Data Initiative, 
the United States is helping empower the people in the Mekong region to 
advance transparent river management, even as they suffer from PRC 
efforts to impede the water flow for the use of their people.
    While the United States advocates for sustainable forestry 
practices and supports the Trillion Trees initiative, China is the 
world's largest consumer of illegal timber products. Perhaps most 
sadly, China is the biggest consumer of illegal wildlife products. 
Wildlife ``wet markets'' create extreme risks for diseases of animal 
origin like COVID-19 to transmit to the human population. I echo 
Secretary Pompeo's call for Beijing to shut down these markets 
immediately and permanently.
    When exposed, Beijing knows how to change its tune. In 2008, U.S. 
diplomats installed air quality monitors on top of the U.S. Embassy in 
Beijing. We shared the data publicly and revealed what residents 
already knew: the air quality was dangerously worse than the CCP was 
willing to admit. That small act of transparency catalysed a revolution 
in air quality management, and Beijing made air quality a priority. 
From that experience, we know the CCP can change--especially if we 
shine a light on their hypocrisy and deceit. Countries, companies, and 
every day citizens can make it clear that it is up to the PRC to end 
these selfish, damaging practices, and protect the air, water, and land 
on which life itself depends.
Conclusion
    Tackling the many facets of the China Challenge will require the 
whole government, our powerful private sector, I appreciate all the 
dedication, energy and leadership of this subcommittee in promoting 
security in our Nation's commerce and advancing America's economic 
security abroad.
    This requires acknowledging the true aspirations of despotic 
regimes. It requires a bold vision for how we can win the international 
economic competition, protect American assets, catalyze a new era of 
prosperity and innovation, create enduring advantages for the American 
people, and spread the success of free enterprise around the world.
    The United States is taking the difficult but necessary steps to 
begin to address the threat now. If we do not, we risk letting the 
opportunity pass and forever regretting that we did. I thank you for 
the opportunity to appear before you today and I look forward to 
working with each of you as we join together to confront a dangerously 
ascendant China and take the steps necessary to safeguard American 
economic security.
