Good morning, Chairman Brown, Ranking Member 
Scott, and distinguished Members of this Committee. Thank you 
for the opportunity to testify today on ``Countering China: 
Advancing U.S. National Security, Economic Security, and 
Foreign Policy''.
    The United States and the PRC are the two largest economies 
in the world. Despite the current tension in our relationship, 
cooperation between the two countries is absolutely critical in 
addressing important global challenges like the climate and 
managing international debt distress. As Secretary Yellen has 
recently noted, the United States does not seek conflict but 
rather a constructive and fair economic relationship with 
China, one where we can work together, when possible, for the 
benefit of our countries and the world.
    Our economic approach to China is guided by three 
objectives: securing the national security interests of the 
United States and our allies and partners and promoting respect 
for human rights; seeking an economic relationship with China 
that fosters growth and innovation in both countries through 
healthy competition; and cooperating on the urgent global 
challenges of our day.
    As I have responsibility for coordinating Treasury policies 
to address, expose, and target national security threats, I 
will briefly address security challenges related to the PRC and 
the tools at Treasury's disposal to address them. I have 
provided more details on these challenges in my written 
statement.
    The first of our national security concerns related to the 
PRC is its challenge to global norms, norms that have 
maintained peace and had a part in enabling the PRC's economic 
growth. This includes acts of economic coercion, economic 
espionage, transnational crime, and human rights abuse.
    Furthermore, we are concerned with China's role in the 
illicit narcotics trade. That is why just yesterday Treasury 
sanctioned and exposed a drug trafficking network that included 
Chinese individuals and entities responsible for shipping pill 
press machinery for counterfeit pill manufacturing, including 
those involved with fentanyl-laced pill production.
    Another concern is the PRC's role in geopolitical conflict 
around the world, including related to Russia, North Korea, and 
China's militarization of international spaces. PRC's support 
for those countries I noted and increased tension along its 
borders, including in international waterways and airspace, 
further destabilizes precarious situations, increasing the risk 
from misunderstandings and miscalculation.
    On Russia, for example, we have sanctioned Chinese entities 
exporting items to Russia in support of its brutal, illegal 
invasion of Ukraine's sovereign territory. Chinese continued 
support for Russia will only prolong that conflict.
    I want to focus now on the suite of Treasury tools and how 
we deploy them in service of our national security concerns.
    First, Treasury publicly exposes threatening activity, 
including through financial sanctions. Public exposure and 
targeting individuals and entities through a sanctions 
designation gives financial institutions and other 
organizations a fuller picture of the illicit activity and 
greater ability to distance themselves from the threat. This is 
often the case for our drug trafficking sanctions, where we map 
and expose the networks moving narcotics and the funds.
    In addition, Treasury regularly engages the private sector, 
providing typologies and red flag indicators as well as partner 
and ally Nations who share similar concerns and can take 
complementary enforcement actions.
    Another way we protect our national security interests is 
by strengthening international anti-financial crime standards 
and by building partner consensus around them. Leadership in 
the Financial Action Task Force, or FATF, the international 
standards-setting body for anti-money laundering and countering 
the financing of terrorism is a major way we accomplish this. 
By leveraging this international forum and building agreement 
around models laws and best practices, we increase the cost for 
actors to reject these norms.
    To conclude, the United States can effectively manage our 
relationship with China by clearly conveying our interests and 
intentions, including about our specific national security 
concerns. Indeed, the health of the global economy rests on how 
we, both the United States and China, can manage our 
relationship and address pressing shared challenges.
    Thank you very much, and I would be happy to take your 
questions.
