Remarks by Treasury Secretary Lew at the 2016 U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue Joint Opening Session 6/6/2016

BEIJING – On behalf of President Obama, Secretary Kerry and I would like to thank President Xi and the entire Chinese delegation, in particular, Vice Premier Wang, Vice Premier Liu, and State Councilor Yang for hosting this eighth Strategic and Economic Dialogue. These discussions continue to raise the level of bilateral cooperation between our two nations, and we look forward to another successful event. As co-chairs of this event for the past three years, Vice Premier Wang and I have worked closely to help strengthen our economic ties, and in the process have developed a close personal working relationship. It has been a true pleasure to serve alongside such a constructive counterpart. While at times we have different perspectives, and we do not always choose the same approach, we have always been able to make progress because our work together is guided by shared respect and a shared belief that it is vital to create tangible results for the citizens of our two countries. The benefits of partnerships like these were apparent since the inception of this Dialogue. And although this will be the last S&ED of the Obama Administration, I believe our record demonstrates why it is so important that such productive bilateral engagement continues. Working closely together has enabled us to better understand our differences, and to identify areas where we can expand cooperation, where common ground on compatible interests can be found. Equally important, our interactions have built a strong foundation so we are better able to narrow our differences and make progress, even on the more difficult issues where we disagree. Our discussions over the next two days will cover a range of issues important to both the American and Chinese people. We will discuss ways to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced growth; how we can improve financial sector function and stability; create opportunities for our companies and workers in each other’s markets; and uphold our joint responsibility of strengthening the international economic system and its high standards of governance. We also look forward to efforts by the Chinese authorities to make progress on a number of priorities of the United States, including to reduce Chinese excess industrial capacity, improve data and regulatory transparency, and lower barriers to trade and investment. Together, the United States and China account for a third of global GDP and nearly 40 percent of recent global growth. Our countries have an enormous stake in each other’s economic success. And, as the world’s two largest economies, our policies and economic management will not only shape the prosperity of our own peoples, they will structurally shape the health and development of the global economy as well. The American economy continues on a path of steady growth. After seven years of sustained growth, key underlying economic indicators show that this positive trajectory will continue going forward. With the unemployment rate near an eight-year low, improved labor market conditions are boosting household incomes, and consumer confidence is near levels that prevailed prior to the Great Recession, but with considerably lower levels of household debt. While slowing, China’s economy continues to be among the fastest growing in the world. The successful implementation of China’s economic reform agenda, which we will be discussing, will be essential for continued growth. As China undergoes a challenging economic transition, implementing reforms that lead to greater openness and give the market the decisive role in allocating resources will support a successful shift towards a more sustainable economic model in a better medium and long term economic outlook. As China charts its course, we recognize our shared interest in the pursuit of policies that support sustainable growth. We see China’s stated reform goals as complementary to the agenda for our bilateral economic engagement, and we hope to focus our plans to implement those reforms to achieve the potential benefit they promise for the future. Consistent with China’s reform agenda, the United States supports efforts to reduce excess capacity and leverage in the economy, and allow market forces to determine the allocation of resources. Excess capacity has a distorting and damaging effect on global markets, and implementing policies to substantially reduce production in a range of sectors suffering from overcapacity, including steel and aluminum, is critical to the function and stability of international markets. We were pleased to see the reforms made last year, and the recognition of that progress in the IMF decision to include the Renminbi in the SDR basket. Again, in line with China’s reform agenda, we also support development of Chinese capital markets, which create conditions to move further toward a market-determined exchange rate, and the adoption of prudent bankruptcy resolution standards. And as a broad policy matter, it is also important that China use its fiscal and lending policies to support stronger consumer demand, since growing consumer demand is essential for a successful economic transition. China has benefited enormously from opening up to, and integrating with, the world economy. All sectors were instrumental in this successful integration, including non-governmental organizations. NGOs have served to strengthen our bilateral relationship and have made new forms of cooperation possible. They help to nurture innovation to address critical human needs, and their work allows for larger economic success. We are very concerned that China’s recently passed Foreign NGO Management Law will weaken that foundation by creating an unwelcome environment for foreign NGOs. President Obama and President Xi have discussed this issue, and addressing it will be important for our bilateral relationship. China’s G-20 presidency this year symbolizes its growing global economic standing. We support a greater role for China in the existing international economic architecture and expect that China will continue to take on more responsibility in maintaining and advancing the high-standards of existing multilateral institutions. To those important ends, continued cooperation between the United States and China on the diverse set of issues covered in the S&ED is crucial. Over the past ten years of this Dialogue, through candid engagement and debate, we have demonstrated and reaffirmed our ability to manage our differences effectively and make progress toward improving the livelihood of American and Chinese citizens. I am proud that we have made concrete progress with China in areas like promoting the rule of law, strengthening exchange rate transparency and regulatory transparency, upholding the high standards of the international financial architecture, opening markets in technology and environmental sectors and furthering economic and financial reforms. It is important that such progress continues in this eighth round of the S&ED and beyond and I would like to thank Vice Premier Wang for his partnership on these issues. We look forward to productive discussions over the next two days as we work together to tackle the mutual challenges we face.

Remarks by Treasury Secretary Lew at the 2016 U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue Economic Track Opening Session

BEIJING – Thank you, Vice Premier Wang and your Chinese colleagues for hosting us this week in Beijing. We look forward to many productive discussions at this year’s S&ED Economic Track meetings. We meet here today because our two countries recognize that we have an enormous shared interest in each other’s economic prosperity, and as the world’s two largest economies, the world has a stake in the success of our policies to foster strong, sustainable, and mutually beneficial growth. And a constructive bilateral relationship between the United States and China has never been more important. Both of our nations must redouble our efforts to promote a global economy that is conducive to sustainable and inclusive growth. We can only achieve these shared goals if we continue to strengthen the engagement between American and Chinese officials across all levels and agencies of our governments. By deepening these ties we have become better-equipped to understand one another’s priorities and concerns and to make progress toward making sustainable economic growth a reality. Mr. Vice Premier, our regular communications have been an important method for keeping our teams focused on moving forward, even on difficult issues, and I have enjoyed our partnership. Let us continue to use these meetings to create economic opportunities for our citizens, and work together to address mutual challenges that face our respective nations and the global economy. In the United States, we remain focused on policies that promote economic growth, job creation, productive investment, and economic stability. Over the coming days, I look forward to discussing the progress we have already made, as well as how we have built a foundation for continuing progress in the future. China has also committed to important domestic reforms in recent years. The Chinese economy is undergoing a necessary but difficult transition, shifting from a dependence on investment to fuel growth toward household consumption, a more sustainable path to achieve economic growth. This transition depends on reforms that lead to greater openness and give the market a decisive role in allocating resources – reforms that have been included in China’s own five-year plan. But this is only effective if implemented well, and we look forward to hearing more about plans for implementation. We are also eager to learn about how China plans to pursue these ambitious and necessary reforms, while at the same time also pursuing a sustained and healthy pace of near-term growth. Importantly, much of what we prioritize in our discussions aligns with China’s own stated supply-side reform agenda. This notably includes reforming state-owned enterprises, where debt service capacity is weakening, opening up the Chinese economy to greater foreign investment, including in the services sector, and undertaking further measures to reduce excess industrial capacity in key sectors such as steel, aluminum, and coal. As China has become more integrated with the global economy, its policies and economic management increasingly cause ripples and spillover into other markets and economies around the world. Last August and early this year, we saw volatility in Chinese markets trigger investor reactions from Europe to the United States. For this reason, it is increasingly important that China provides all observers the ability to better understand developments in its economy and policies. China’s commitments to greater regulatory and data transparency, as well as a more accountable, open government are welcome steps. In addition to implementing these commitments, the events over the past year have underscored the importance of effective communication in both policy development and implementation. This is especially true regarding foreign exchange policy. China has tools to support an orderly transition to a market-oriented exchange rate. A market-determined exchange rate with two-way flexibility will help foster a more efficient allocation of capital. And continued clear communication of foreign exchange policies and actions will build credibility with financial markets. A vibrant and resilient financial sector will also be critical to China’s economic transformation. Opening China’s financial sector to full foreign participation will help promote competition and efficiency, increase funds available to small firms, boost household access to a broader range of financial products, and support rebalancing towards consumption-led growth. It is also important that China continue to reform its regulatory regime to bolster financial stability. This includes continuing to strengthen the cooperation between our financial regulators, to support investor protection and effective supervision, especially as Chinese firms and investors become more integrated into global financial markets. But it also has a price, and that is the ups and downs that markets go through from day-to-day. Outside of the financial sector, we remain equally committed to pursuing a level playing field for American and Chinese investment and trade. We continue to call on China to open its markets by liberalizing its investment rules, including through a mutually beneficial, high-standard bilateral investment treaty, as well as through more immediate market openings. These important steps would go a long way to strengthening confidence in China’s reforms. I hope to discuss means of advancing BIT negotiations to encourage continued support from stakeholders in both of our countries. High standards are hard to meet, but will pay off in stronger economic growth going forward. The United States stands ready to advance the ongoing bilateral investment treaty negotiations provided that China is prepared to move forward in negotiating a high-standard and mutually beneficial agreement. As we have seen, concerns about the business climate in China have risen. Candidly, foreign businesses wonder if they are welcome, and find China’s regulatory environment harder and harder to navigate. I hope that through this engagement, we can continue to make progress in resolving trade barriers and regulatory hurdles, and increasing transparency and openness. Producing significant outcomes will demonstrate the ongoing value of the S&ED as an institution and build support for continuing these sessions in the future. We also have the opportunity to demonstrate joint leadership on a number of fronts—in the G-20, in the multilateral development and climate finance institutions, and in working together to forge new rules and architecture in areas such as export financing. Building on the positive steps we took together during President Xi’s visit to the United States last September, we will continue to support a growing role and voice for China within the international financial architecture as China takes on greater responsibility and joins us in upholding and advancing the system’s high standards. I look forward to exchanging ideas over the next two days on these and other important issues. Thank you for again welcoming us so graciously to your country, and for hosting this eighth round of the S&ED, a mechanism which has truly become the cornerstone of our bilateral economic relationship.