OK. Mr. Chairman, Senator Shelby, and 
Members of the Committee, thank you very much for the 
opportunity to have this dialog with you today on an issue of 
vital importance to American workers and the American economy. 
As you know, the Foreign Exchange Report recently issued by the 
Treasury reviews developments in international economics and 
the exchange rate policies of a number of our key trading 
partners.
    Let me first take a few minutes to talk about the important 
and multifaceted relationship we have with China. Getting it 
right is vitally important to the citizens of both our nations 
and the world and will be so for many years to come.
    Since the economic relationship between our two countries 
is an important part of our overall relationship, I have 
focused intensely on China from the day I was confirmed. It is 
my job to press for opportunities for American businesses and 
American workers. The successful management of our economic 
relationship with China will benefit the United States and 
China greatly.
    The United States and China share many strategic interests. 
These range from national security to economic growth and trade 
to the health of our environment. As a growing leader on the 
world stage, China must be a full participant in the rules-
based world economy. Recognizing this, the President and 
Chinese President Hu established a Strategic Economic Dialogue 
to manage the economic relationship between our two nations on 
a long-term basis.
    The SED should help us make progress on fundamental long-
term structural economic issues as well as on very pressing 
short-term issues. It is not a scripted ceremony. It is a 
serious, focused discussion of the economic issues that matter 
most.
    The SED provides a mechanism through which, for the first 
time in our relationship, our Government can speak with a 
single voice on economic issues to the highest levels of the 
Chinese Government and do so on a regular basis. The dialog is 
goals based and designed to keep both sides moving forward on 
goals that we establish. By meeting regularly, we can actively 
monitor the progress we are making. By making progress on 
critical immediate issues such as currency reform, we will 
build the confidence to deal with the important longer-term 
economic issues, such as the structural challenges China faces.
    China's currency policy is a key factor in our economic 
relationship. China does not yet have the currency policy we 
want it to have and that it needs. Treasury's Foreign Exchange 
Report clearly states that China's cautious approach to 
exchange rate reform exacerbates distortions in its domestic 
economy and impedes the adjustment of international imbalances. 
I look forward to discussing the report with you during this 
hearing.
    We are actively pressing the Chinese to introduce greater 
currency flexibility and to undertake wider market reform. We 
are seeing some results. China abandoned its pegged exchange 
rate in July of 2005 and began to introduce some flexibility. 
Since last July, the pace of appreciation has been more than 
three times as fast as it had been in the first year after the 
initial renminbi reform. Foreign currency trading, once 
conducted entirely by the Chinese Government, is now conducted 
almost entirely by commercial banks.
    China has introduced financial instruments to hedge foreign 
exchange risk, and the Chinese Government has begun to allow 
increased fluctuations in the currency. This is welcome 
progress, but we need to see much more. Although China is 
moving faster, it is still not moving fast enough. Nor is 
currency flexibility enough. A major objective of my 2 
remaining years as Treasury Secretary will be pressing the 
Chinese Government to advance toward the goal of renminbi whose 
value is freely set in a competitive marketplace based upon 
economic fundamentals.
    I will work with the Chinese Government to develop the 
market infrastructure they need for a freely floating currency. 
This involves several key steps.
    First, the government should progressively widen the band 
that limits the daily movements of the exchange rate. Widening 
the band will help businesses and financial institutions learn 
to operate with a fluctuating currency.
    Second, the central bank should progressively reduce its 
intervention in foreign exchange markets.
    Third, China must develop the fundamental components of a 
capital market, a bond market and a yield curve, to absorb 
inflows and outflows of foreign exchange and provide ways to 
hedge against exchange risk.
    And, fourth, China's central bank must set clear policy 
targets to avoid inflation and thereby provide confidence in 
the value of the Chinese currency.
    I want to be clear. Increased flexibility in the short run 
is absolutely necessary, but it is not sufficient. My goal is 
to make significant progress toward a fully market-determined 
floating Chinese currency. The message I delivered to Chinese 
decisionmakers in the first meeting of our Strategic Economic 
Dialogue in December is that they are not moving quickly enough 
to make their currency more flexible. While they agreed they 
need to increase currency flexibility and move to a floating 
exchange rate, they are not moving quickly enough for the 
United States or the rest of the global community, and they are 
not moving quickly enough for their own good. The Chinese 
leaders believe there is risk in moving too quickly when, in 
fact, as I argued to them, the greater risk is in moving too 
slowly. China may be in some respects a developing country, but 
it is also a large and powerful country. The international 
community will run out of patience with China unless the pace 
of its reform accelerates.
    Reform of China's currency policy is a crucial issue for 
China and the United States, and, Mr. Chairman, the need for 
reform in the Chinese economy goes beyond currency. Currency 
movement alone will not eliminate the distortions in the 
Chinese economy, nor significantly reduce its trade surplus. 
China needs to restructure its economy so that household 
consumption--rather than exports and excess investment--powers 
growth. This is the only way that China can grow without 
generating huge trade surpluses.
    To do this, Chinese policy must address the reasons why 
Chinese households feel compelled to save so much and spend so 
little. Only 20 percent of 800 million people who live in rural 
areas in China have health insurance. The basic government 
pension covered only 17 percent of Chinese workers in 2005. And 
only 14 percent of the population is covered by unemployment 
insurance. China must invest in its people by strengthening its 
health care system and the social safety net, and Chinese 
households need financial products that insure against risk and 
finance major expenditures. The Strategic Economic Dialogue 
addresses all of these issues.
    I believe that the openness of the U.S. economy to 
competition and our participation in international trade are 
key to economic growth, higher wages, and increased 
opportunities for U.S. workers. We saw the importance of trade 
for U.S. workers, as the Chairman just mentioned, in this 
morning's strong GDP data. GDP growth in the fourth quarter was 
3.5 percent, and inflation was moderate at 1.5 percent. Trade 
contributed more than 1.6 percentage points to growth, with 
double-digit exports gains accounting for more than 1 
percentage point.
    We have reached a crossover point at which American exports 
are now growing faster than imports and have been doing so for 
four consecutive quarters. We are pressing China to follow our 
example of openness, and I am working to ensure that China's 
growth and expanding market create maximum opportunities for 
the United States. China must live up to its WTO commitments. 
It must protect and vigorously enforce intellectual property 
rights. It must increasingly open its markets to foreign 
competition for its own good as well as ours. And it must 
introduce greater transparency in regulation and observe the 
rule of law. Through the Strategic Economic Dialogue and 
through the various economic dialogs we have with China, the 
administration will continue to press very hard in all of these 
areas.
    Mr. Chairman, America's economy and workers benefit 
significantly from our trade with China. China is our fourth 
largest export market. Our exports to China have increased more 
than 350 percent over the last decade, 6 times the growth of 
our exports to the rest of the world. And nearly half of our 
exports to China are capital goods, including high-value-added 
goods such as civilian aircraft, electrical machinery, and 
medical devices.
    I believe strongly that a healthy Chinese economy, growing 
without large external imbalances, is of vital interest to the 
people of the United States, to the people of China, and to the 
global economy as a whole. More constant flexibility in the 
short term and a fully market-determined floating renminbi in 
the intermediate term are essential to accomplish this goal. So 
is restructuring the Chinese economy so that the domestic 
consumption demand, not exports, fuels Chinese growth. Broad 
structural changes are necessary to have a major impact on our 
trade deficit with China.
    The next round of the SED will take place here in 
Washington in May. I understand that all of your constituents 
are very concerned about the impact of our relationship with 
China on their jobs and on their livelihoods. China is a big 
and important part of the world economy. It needs a currency 
whose value is determined in an open, competitive marketplace 
and an economy that supports more balanced, stable growth.
    I look forward to working with the Members of this 
distinguished Committee on the many important issues we have 
before us, and I now welcome your questions. Thank you.
