 Mr. Taylor. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for inviting 
me to this important hearing.
    This is the fifth time I have appeared before this 
subcommittee to address various international economic issues. 
Previous testimonies were on emerging markets, developing 
countries, removing barriers to the free flow of capital. In 
each of these cases, I have stressed that the goal of our 
policies is to raise economic growth and increase economic 
stability around the world and, in doing so, benefit the 
American people with more jobs, more security and a better 
life. My testimony today will be no different in this respect.
    The administration's major economic endeavor now is to 
strengthen the economic recovery in the United States. The jobs 
and growth package enacted into the law this summer was 
essential, but there are barriers to economic growth in other 
countries. This is where our international economic strategy 
comes in.
    Our policy towards China is part of this strategy. The 
strategy is to urge the removal of rigidities and barriers 
wherever they exist and to encourage pro-growth, pro-stability 
policies that benefit the United States and the whole world. It 
is a two-track approach of domestic and international. The 
international part is applied both bilaterally and 
multilaterally.
    I am pleased to report that this endeavor is working. 
Economic growth in the United States is picking up 
significantly now after the severe shocks of the terrorist 
attacks, the corporate accounting scandals, and the stock 
market drop of 2000. Global economic growth is also improving.
    There are also notable improvements in economic stability 
around the world. The number and the severity of financial 
market crises are down. Capital flows are up, and interest rate 
spreads are down compared to the late 1990s. This improvement 
is very important for the United States. Greater economic 
stability is essential to creating a long-lasting recovery, 
which is needed for sustainable job growth in the United 
States.
    Despite this progress, we need to do more. During the 
summer months, Secretary of Treasury Snow embarked on an 
international pro-growth tour to Europe, to Asia, including 
China, as I will discuss in a minute, culminating in the annual 
meetings of the IMF and World Bank in Dubai, where he forged a 
new agreement on a new G-7 agenda for growth.
    But now let me address China's economy and its exchange 
rate policy and how it fits into this overall strategy. Free 
market reforms in China have made China one of the largest 
economies in the world. But for nearly 10 years now, the 
Chinese have maintained a fixed exchange rate for their 
currency, the yuan relative to the dollar. In doing so, they 
have accumulated a large amount of foreign exchange. At the 
same time, China has significantly restricted capital flows 
into and out of China.
    With this rapid growth and accumulation of foreign exchange 
reserve, China is now in a position, in our view, to show 
leadership on the important issue of exchange rate flexibility. 
A flexible exchange rate regime would be good policy for China. 
It would allow China to open the nation to capital flows and at 
the same time reduce macroeconomic imbalances.
    We have been urging China to reduce barriers in other 
areas, such as trade and capital flows. As you know, tariffs on 
manufactured goods are scheduled to come down from the average 
of 17 percent now to an average about 9 percent as a result of 
the WTO commitments. I think this should be accelerated. Even 
at 9 percent, China will be well above the United States's 
average and the average of other large economies, which now 
stands around 4 percent. It is important for China to go 
further in reducing these trade barriers as well.
    Secretary Snow has encouraged these changes during his very 
successful trip to Beijing last month. He met with Premier Wen, 
Vice Premier Huang, Central Bank Governor Zhou and Finance 
Minister Jin. During Secretary Snow's visit to China, a number 
of important announcements were made by the China Central Bank, 
including steps to remove restrictions on money and capital. 
They have indicated the intention to move forward towards more 
exchange rate flexibility.
    In addition, following Secretary Snow's trip, a number of 
new economic engagements between China and the United States 
have been discussed, in particular a whole new engagement 
between China and the entire G-7. The first meeting between 
senior officials from the G-7 and the finance ministry in 
Central Bank of China took place in Dubai last week and 
represented a significant degree of exchange on economic 
issues.
    So I am pleased to report, Mr. Chairman and other members 
of the committee, that our efforts to engage in financial 
diplomacy are bearing fruit. Active engagement with China and 
other countries is paving the way towards freer markets. The 
administration's effort to raise growth in the United States 
and abroad, and thereby create jobs at home, is already showing 
signs of success.
    Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will be happy to 
answer your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Hon. John B. Taylor can be found 
on page 85 in the appendix.]
    Chairman King. Thank you, Secretary Taylor.
    I understand Mr. Manzullo wanted to make a motion to have 
his full statement made a part of the record. Without 
objection, so ordered.
    Secretary Aldonas?