Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Brown, Ranking 
Member Scott, and distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank 
you for allowing me to be here today to testify on this 
important national security topic.
    At the Department of the Treasury, we understand the 
significant challenge that China poses to the economic and 
national security interest of the United States. I manage the 
Government's review of foreign investment coming into the 
United States for national security risks through the
    Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. In 
this work we are focused on stopping the access and 
exploitation of sensitive technologies, infrastructure, data, 
and other assets by those who have the intent and capability to 
harm our national security.
    Recently, Secretary Yellen addressed the U.S.-China 
economic relationship. In her remarks, she conveyed that China 
and the United States can and need to find a way to live 
together and share in global prosperity. She also stressed the 
importance of our countries working together, when possible, 
for the benefit of the world.
    At the same time, Secretary Yellen was crystal clear when 
it comes to national security: the United States will secure 
our national security interests and those of our allies and 
partners. We remain firm in our conviction to defend our 
values. We will not hesitate to defend our vital interests, and 
we will not compromise on national security concerns, even when 
they force tradeoffs with our economic interests. We will fully 
and zealously exercise our economic tools to protect the 
national security of the United States.
    CFIUS is one important tool to address national security 
that pursues these objectives. The committee--comprised of the 
heads of several Executive branch agencies, which I help lead 
in support of the Secretary of the Treasury's role as Chair--
carefully reviews foreign investments in the United States for 
national security risks. When necessary, the committee takes 
action to address any such risks while seeking to maintain an 
open investment environment and the status of the United States 
as one of the top destinations for foreign direct investment in 
the world.
    Over the years, as the national security threat environment 
has evolved, so has CFIUS. First established, as you know, by 
Executive order in 1975, the committee has benefited from 
congressional action to codify and enhance its authorities. As 
was pointed out by the Chairman, most recently, Congress did so 
with the bipartisan Foreign Investment Risk Review 
Modernization Act of 2018. Among other things, FIRRMA provided 
the committee with important authorities over certain 
investment structures that had previously fallen outside of its 
jurisdiction and modernized our processes and procedures to 
better and more timely and more effectively review covered 
transactions. It also, importantly, provided the committee with 
much needed jurisdiction over certain transactions involving 
real estate in close proximity to sensitive facilities.
    Since I was confirmed to my role as Assistant Secretary for 
Investment Security, I have been focused on making sure CFIUS 
operates effectively and efficiently, bringing to bear all of 
our available resources and tools to support our important 
national security mission. This effort includes the issuance of 
the first Executive order since the committee was established 
to provide formal Presidential direction on additional risks 
that we are to consider when reviewing a covered transaction. 
It also includes the issuance of our first-ever enforcement and 
penalty guidelines to ensure that transaction parties are held 
accountable for failing to comply with our laws and for not 
upholding their obligations to mitigate national security risk.
    While Congress rightly put in place strict confidentiality 
requirements for information filed with CFIUS, we have and will 
continue to take enforcement actions on particular matters to 
protect our national security. We are also enhancing our 
tactics and techniques to ensure we are gathering more detailed 
information about foreign acquirers, more detailed information 
about deal structures, and thoroughly assess the national 
security risks arising in connection with any transaction.
    We also continue to enhance our ability to identify non-
notified transactions, that is transactions that are not 
voluntarily brought to CFIUS, and we are also engaging with our 
international partners and allies.
    Finally, as we protect national security in the context of 
inbound investments, we continue to contribute to the 
interagency discussions regarding policies to restrict certain 
U.S. outbound investment flows in specific sensitive 
technologies with significant national security implications. 
Our desire is to avoid situations in which U.S. investments and 
business know-how support and advance technologies that enhance 
military or intelligence capabilities in countries of concern 
that could undermine our national security and put Americans at 
risk.
    While we are proud of the Committee's work, our work 
remains unfinished, and there is always more we can do. We 
remain focused on being as effective as we can in our national 
security mission. And you have my commitment, Senators, that we 
will use all authorities available to protect the national 
security of the United States, including, in particular, 
against national security threats posed by the PRC.
    Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you, and I 
look forward to your questions.
