Mr. TAYLOR. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking 
Member Rangel, for inviting us to testify on this very 
important subject. Our economic relations with China are an 
important part of our overall economic strategy. The goal of 
that strategy is to strengthen the current economic recovery in 
the United States and to establish conditions that will lead to 
a long expansion in future years.
    The tax cuts, which began in this Committee and which were 
enacted into law this summer, is an essential part of that 
policy, as are the President's proposals for tort reform, 
regulatory reform, and health care reform. Even with these 
policy reforms in the United States, there are significant 
barriers to economic growth in other countries, and these 
barriers affect the United States. That is why the 
international component of our economic strategy is so 
important. The strategy has been to urge countries to remove 
the rigidities and barriers that exist, wherever they exist, 
and to encourage pro-growth strategies that benefit the United 
States and the world economy.
    This international strategy is built on bilateral 
relationships like our relationship with China. It also has a 
multilateral foundation. Our overall economic strategy is 
showing progress, as today's announcement of 7.2 percent growth 
in the third quarter indicates. Global growth is improving, 
too.
    Despite this progress, we need to do more. That is why we 
have launched, for example, a new agenda for growth with the G-
7 countries, and that is why we started up a new group for 
growth between the United States and Brazil. That is why we 
started up several new relationships in economic matters with 
China.
    Exchange rate policy also has a bearing on growth and 
economic stability. Earlier today, the Department of the 
Treasury issued its latest report on international economic and 
exchange rate policies. This report examines exchange rate 
policies in major countries around the world.
    Secretary Snow testified this morning on this report. The 
report reiterated our view that flexible exchange rates are 
desirable for large economies in our international financial 
system. The report documents that a number of countries 
continue to use paid exchange rates or intervene substantially 
in the foreign exchange market. The Administration strongly 
believes that a system of flexible market-based exchange rates 
is best for major economies. For this reason, the 
Administration is aggressively encouraging our major trading 
partners to adopt policies that promote such exchange rates.
    For nearly 10 years now, the Chinese have maintained a 
fixed exchange rate to their currency relative to the dollar. 
The rate has been pegged at about 8.28 yuan per dollar for this 
entire period. China, in addition, has significant controls on 
capital flows. However, with its rapid growth, which has been 
referred to already, and its substantial foreign exchange 
reserve, China has an opportunity and is in a position to show 
leadership on the important goal of exchange rate flexibility 
and capital controls. If these relaxations took place, it would 
allow China to open the nation to capital flows and reduce 
imbalances, and we have been urging China to move in this 
direction.
    We have also urged the Chinese to move forward in two other 
areas, reductions in barriers to trade and the removal of 
restrictions on capital flows. China's restrictions on capital 
flows are one of the major rigidities interfering with the 
market forces. The authorities understand this, we have worked 
with them, and they have begun to reduce these barriers to 
financial markets.
    President Bush recently met with President Hu, and he 
discussed each of these economic issues and discussed the 
importance of reducing barriers to trade, to removing the 
restrictions on capital, and to moving to a flexible market-
based exchange rate.
    Secretary Snow traveled to Beijing this summer. He met with 
Premier Wen, with the Vice Premier Huang. He met with the 
Central Bank Governor Zhou and Finance Minister Jin. This visit 
of Secretary Snow, we believe, has achieved significant 
progress including new policy announcements by the Central 
Bank, reducing restrictions on foreign firms managing their 
foreign exchange, significantly liberalizing provisions to 
allow Chinese travelers to take foreign currency out of the 
country, examples of reductions on restrictions on capital 
flows.
    The United States will continue to urge the Chinese to make 
rapid progress in these areas. We intend to continue both 
technical work and high-level talks on this subject with the 
Chinese. We have just established a new U.S.-China technical 
cooperation program in the financial area that will help China 
develop its financial markets infrastructure, including the 
foreign exchange market. The Chinese have agreed to interact 
with the G-7 financial officials on talks about economic 
issues.
    In sum, I am pleased to report that our economic strategy 
is showing progress. Global economic growth has accelerated, 
led by an even stronger acceleration of growth in the United 
States. Our efforts to engage in financial diplomacy are 
generating constructive responses, though, as I indicated, more 
needs to be done. Active engagement with China and other 
countries is paving the way toward freer markets. This 
Administration's effort to raise growth in the United States 
and abroad and thereby create jobs at home is succeeding. Thank 
you very much.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]
Statement of the Honorable John B. Taylor, Under Secretary of Treasury 
       for International Affairs, U.S. Department of the Treasury
    Chairman Thomas, Ranking Member Rangel, Members of the Committee, 
thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify on economic 
relations between the United States and China and on China's role in 
the global economy.
International Economic Strategy
    Our economic relations with China are an important part of our 
overall economic strategy. The goal of that strategy is to strengthen 
the current economic recovery and establish conditions that will lead 
to a long economic expansion in the United States. The economic 
expansions of the 1980s and the 1990s were the first and second longest 
peacetime expansions in American history, and with the right policies 
there is no reason to expect that the current expansion will not be as 
long or longer. The Jobs and Growth package enacted into law this 
summer, is an essential part of the policy, as are the President's 
proposals for tort reform, regulatory reform, and health care reform.
    But even with these policy reforms in the United States there are 
barriers to economic growth in other countries. And these barriers have 
ramifications for economic growth in the United States. This is why the 
international component of our economic strategy is so important. The 
strategy has been to urge the removal of rigidities and barriers 
wherever they exist, and to encourage pro-growth and pro-stability 
policies that benefit the United States and the whole world. The 
international strategy is built on bilateral economic relationships, 
including, of course, our relationship with China. It also has a 
multilateral foundation, including the meetings of groups such as the 
G-20, where China is included, or the newly established talks between 
economic officials from China and the G-7.
Global Economic Recovery
    Thanks to the recent fiscal and monetary policy actions, the United 
States economy is now expanding much more rapidly. Consumer spending is 
growing at a very strong pace, housing remains solid, and business 
investment is picking up. The latest data also show exports to be 
gaining strength compared with the first half of the year. The 
September employment data showed a promising increase in jobs as well.
    Global growth is also improving. There is continuing evidence of 
stronger economic growth in the Japan, Canada, and the United Kingdom. 
An increase in business and consumer confidence in the Euro area is a 
welcome sign that economic recovery is on the way there too. Much of 
Asia seems to have bounded back from the SARS induced slowdown in the 
first part of the year. Growth in China recovered sharply in the third 
quarter following a decline in the second quarter. Growth in other 
emerging markets is also picking up as the number of crises is down, 
capital flows are up, and interest rate spreads are low compared with 
the late 1990s.
Pressing Ahead on the Global Economic Expansion
    Despite this progress, we need to do more. Last month the G-7 
launched a new Agenda for Growth. For the first time each G-7 country 
will take part in a process of benchmarking and reporting actions to 
spur growth and create jobs. Another example is the new United States-
Brazil Group for Growth through which we will work together to identify 
pro-growth strategies at the micro as well as macro levels.
    Exchange rate policy also has bearing on growth and stability. 
Earlier today the Treasury issued its latest Report on International 
Economic and Exchange Rate Policies. This report examines exchange rate 
policies in major countries around the world. The Report reiterated our 
view that flexible exchange rates are desirable for large economies. 
However, the report documents that a number of countries continued to 
use pegged exchange rates and/or to intervene substantially in the 
foreign exchange market. The Administration strongly believes that a 
system of flexible, market-based exchange rates is best for major 
economies. For this reason, the Bush Administration is aggressively 
encouraging our major trading partners to adopt policies that promote 
flexible market-based exchange rates combined with a clear price 
stability goal and a transparent system for adjusting the policy 
instruments.
    The move by several large emerging market countries--such as 
Brazil, Korea, and Mexico--to flexible exchange rates combined with 
clear price stability goals and a transparent system for adjusting the 
policy instruments is one of the reasons we are seeing fewer crises and 
greater stability. We emphasize that the choice of an exchange rate 
regime is one where country ownership is particularly important. We 
also recognize that, especially in the case of small open economies, 
there are benefits from a ``hard'' exchange rate peg, whether 
dollarizing, as with El Salvador, joining a currency union, as with 
Greece, or using a credible currency board, as in Bulgaria.
The Economy of China and its Links to the United States and the Global 
        Economy
    Let me now address China's economy. Economic reforms in China have 
increased economic growth and transformed China into a major economy in 
the world, both in terms of total production and in terms of purchases 
and sales of goods with the rest of the world. Yet, with per capita 
income of only about $1,000 per year and with financial, legal and 
regulatory systems in need of reform, China still faces challenges in 
its effort to catch up with developed economies.
    China's global current account surplus was under 3 percent of GDP 
in 2002 and declined to 1.8 percent in the first half of 2003. Despite 
the relatively small overall surplus, China has a large trade surplus 
with the United States. This means, of course, that China has a large 
deficit with the rest of the world. China's bilateral trade surplus 
with the United States was $103 billion in 2002 while China's trade 
deficit with the rest of the world was about $73 billion, leaving an 
overall surplus of $30 billion. Many imports from China are goods from 
other Asian economies that are processed or finished off in China 
before shipping to the United States and other countries. Other East 
Asian economies increasingly send goods to China for final processing 
before they are shipped to the United States. China accounted for 11 
percent of U.S. imports in 2002, up from 3 percent in 1990. Meanwhile, 
the combined share of Japan, Korea and Taiwan in U.S. imports declined 
to 17 percent from 27 percent over the same period. Thus, the total 
share of U.S. imports coming from these four Asian countries has 
remained steady since 1990, actually falling slightly from 30 percent 
to 29 percent.
    U.S. imports from China are about 1 percent of U.S. GDP, or 11 
percent of total U.S. imports. U.S. imports from China have been 
increasing rapidly, between 20 and 25 percent in 2002 and 2003. In 
general, these imports result from China using low-skilled labor to 
assemble and process imported parts and materials originating in other 
countries--mostly from other Asian countries that have traditionally 
exported directly to the United States. Consequently, the share of U.S. 
imports from these other countries has declined just as China's share 
has increased. Asia's share of U.S. imports has declined slightly. Much 
of the increase in U.S. imports from China has come at the expense of 
imports that once came directly from other Asian countries.
    At the same time, U.S. merchandise exports to China grew 21 percent 
in the first 8 months of this year. Growth has been especially rapid in 
recent years for U.S. exports to China of transportation equipment 
(including aircraft engines), machinery, chemicals, and semiconductors.
    The U.S. trade deficit with China should be viewed in the context 
of the overall trade deficit of the United States. The U.S. trade 
deficit is spread across many countries of the world in addition to 
China. For instance, the overall trade deficit reached $468 billion 
last year with 1) the Americas accounting for $105 billion, 2) Western 
Europe $89 billion, 3) Japan $70 billion, and 4) China $103 billion. 
The U.S. overall trade and current account deficit is best understood 
in terms of the gap between investment and saving in the United States. 
If this gap were reduced through an increment in savings, the overall 
deficit could shrink as would the size of the bilateral deficits. 
Increased growth abroad is also crucial to increasing U.S. exports.
China's Exchange Rate Regime
    For nearly ten years now, the Chinese have maintained a fixed 
exchange rate for their currency relative to the dollar. The rate has 
been pegged at about 8.28 yuan/dollar for the entire period. Thus, as 
the dollar has appreciated or depreciated in value relative to other 
currencies, such as the euro or the yen, the yuan has appreciated or 
depreciated by the same amount relative to these other countries.
    To maintain this fixed exchange rate, the central bank of China has 
had to intervene in the foreign exchange market. It sells yuan in 
exchange for dollar denominated assets when the demand for the yuan 
increases and it buys yuan with dollar denominated assets when the 
demand for the yuan decreases. Recently the central bank has intervened 
very heavily in the markets to prevent the yuan from appreciating. 
Since the end of 2001, dollar buying has been so great that the foreign 
reserves held by the Chinese government have risen by $171 billion to 
$384 billion (as of end-September).
    This accumulation of foreign exchange reserves would tend to expand 
China's money supply, although in recent months the Chinese central 
bank has moved to reign in monetary expansion. Among other measures to 
sterilize reserve accumulation, the central bank has--for the first 
time--begun issuing central bank paper to restrict growth of the 
monetary base. Nevertheless, the broader money supply continues to grow 
very rapidly: M2 climbed 21 percent over the 12 months ending in 
September 2003.
    It is also important to recognize that China still has significant 
capital controls. China's capital controls allow for more inflows than 
outflows, thus bolstering foreign exchange reserves. China is gradually 
loosening some controls, and outflows are likely to grow as new 
channels develop for Chinese to seek diversification and better returns 
than those offered by low domestic interest rates. Indeed, there is 
already significant leakage of capital. A relaxation of controls on 
outflows would reduce upward pressure on the yuan.
Economic Relations Between the United States and China
    With its rapid growth and substantial foreign exchange reserves, 
China is now in a position to show leadership on the important global 
issue of exchange rate flexibility. China represents one of the largest 
economies in the world, and a flexible exchange rate regime would be a 
good policy for China. It would allow China to open the nation to 
capital flows and reduce macroeconomic imbalances. We have been urging 
China to move to a flexible exchange rate.
    We have also urged the Chinese to move forward in two other areas: 
reductions in barriers to trade and capital flows. In the area of 
trade, it is important for China to fully implement, and even surpass, 
the commitments it made to the World Trade Organization. It is 
important that China continue to open markets to U.S. services, 
agricultural and industrial products, and to effectively enforce 
intellectual property laws.
    China's restrictions on capital flows are one of the major 
rigidities interfering with market forces. The authorities understand 
this and are beginning to reduce barriers to capital flows and develop 
more open and sophisticated capital markets. They are also working to 
strengthen the banking system and liberalize capital flows in order to 
prepare for a more flexible exchange rate.
    Secretary Snow traveled to Beijing last month to urge further 
progress. He met Premier Wen, Vice Premier Huang, Central Bank Governor 
Zhou, and Finance Minister Jin. He met again with the Finance Minister 
and Central Bank Governor last week in Mexico.
    President Bush recently met with President Hu. He discussed each of 
these economic issues. He stressed the importance of reducing barriers 
to trade, of removing restrictions on the transfer of capital, and of 
moving to a flexible, market-based, exchange rate. Recently, both 
Secretary Evans and US Trade Representative Robert Zoellick traveled to 
China to stress the importance market opening, especially in the area 
of trade in goods and services. In an important recent development, 
Vice Premier Huang has accepted an invitation to come to the United 
States to engage in high-level talks with Secretary Snow.
    All of Secretary Snow's meetings have been detailed and candid. He 
stated publicly, ``the establishment of flexible exchange rates, of a 
flexible exchange rate regime, would benefit both our nations as well 
as our regional and global trading partners.'' The Chinese reported 
that they intend to move to a market-based flexible exchange rate as 
they open the capital account. The central bank governor stated 
publicly that reform of the exchange rate regime is a central part of 
their foreign exchange reforms.
    Secretary Snow's visit to Beijing achieved significant progress, 
including new policy announcements by China's central bank; liberalized 
regulations for foreign firms managing their foreign exchange; and 
significantly liberalized provisions to allow Chinese travelers to take 
foreign currency out of the country and to do so more frequently. The 
United States will continue to urge the Chinese to make rapid progress 
in these areas.
    We intend to continue both technical work and high-level talks and 
on this subject. We have just established a United States-China 
Technical Cooperation Program in the financial area that will help 
China develop its financial market infrastructure, including the 
foreign exchange market.
    The Chinese and the G-7 agreed to engage in talks about these 
economic issues. This represents another example of how China, the 
United States and other affected parties can come together to work on 
an issue of vital interest to them all. The first meeting between 
senior officials from the G-7 and China's finance ministry and central 
bank took place in September in Dubai, where the Chinese economy, the 
G-7 economies, and other economic issues, were discussed. Further 
meetings will be scheduled on a regular basis with China, the United 
States and the other G-7 countries. After the Dubai meeting, China's 
central bank representative said that China is moving as fast as it can 
in its reform.
Conclusion
    I am pleased to report that our economic strategy is showing 
progress: global economic growth is accelerating, led by an even 
stronger acceleration of economic growth in the United States. Our 
efforts to engage in financial diplomacy are generating constructive 
responses, though much more needs to be done. Active engagement with 
China and other countries is paving the way toward freer markets. The 
Administration's effort to raise growth in the United States and 
abroad, and thereby create jobs at home is succeeding.