EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

Brussels, 19.3.2025
COM(2025) 125 final

COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS
A European Steel and Metals Action Plan

EN

EN

COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS
A European Steel and Metals Action Plan
It is no coincidence that the European Union was built on steel. Europe has a
longstanding and proud history of steel and base metals production1. Europe’s edge in
high-value and other steel and base metals products is a crucial asset for many downstream
industries and products. These sectors are vital for the EU’s economic security and social
stability. Recognising their strategic importance, the Competitiveness Compass2 identified
steel and metals as a key area for action.
These sectors all share major common challenges for their competitiveness: high
energy costs, exposure to an unlevel playing field in international competition,
decarbonisation investment needs and regulatory burden. Over the last decade, the EU
share of global steel production shrunk to 7-8%, while primary aluminium production
represents 3.8%3. In parallel, other countries, notably China and in recent years India, and
several other countries in Asia and the Middle East, massively expanded their production
capacity, often supported by distortive subsidies. As a result, just for steel, in 2024, global
overcapacity was estimated to be more than four and a half times the EU’s yearly
consumption4.
While EU production is still able to cover most of the EU’s domestic demand in steel
(90%)5 and copper (83%)6, the situation is already more worrying in aluminium
(46%)7 and nickel (25%)8, especially considering the projected high growth in demand
by 2030 for aluminium, copper and nickel. Additionally, all these metals are essential for
defence. For example, a main battle tank contains 50 to 60 tonnes of high-quality steel, a
self-propelled artillery system, up to 100 tonnes, a fighter aircraft 3 tonnes of aluminium 9.
Ensuring a stable and resilient supply chain for these materials is critical to strengthening
the European Defence Technological and Industrial Base, ensuring the EU’s preparedness
and internal security, meeting EU defence and aerospace needs, and ensuring tech
sovereignty.
The European metals industries are committed to investing in decarbonisation and
depollution technologies and contributing to the EU’s climate and environmental
(1) In addition to iron and steel, base metals include ferro-alloys, intricately linked with the steel value
chain, as well as the non-ferrous metals aluminium, copper, and nickel. In this action plan, the focus is
on base metals that are produced and traded in large volumes, not on smaller-volume technology metals
or precious metals, which are often critical raw materials and thus benefit from the provisions of the
Critical Raw Materials Act.
(2) COM(2025) 30 10017eb1-4722-4333-add2-e0ed18105a34_en
(3) https://international-aluminium.org/statistics/primary-aluminium-production/
(4) Source: OECD steel committee: 96th Session of the Steel Committee: Statement by the Chair | OECD
https://www.oecd.org/en/about/news/speech-statements/2024/11/96th-session-of-the-steel-committeestatement-by-the-chair.html
(5) Source: Eurofer, 126 mn tonnes production/138 mn tonnes real consumption in 2023
(6) Source: SCRREEN factsheet 2023 on copper
(7) Source: European Aluminium: 7% domestic primary production + 39% domestic recycling in 2023
(8) Source: SCRREEN factsheet 2023 on nickel
(9) JRC Publications Repository - Raw materials in the European defence industry
1

ambition, with the metals10 industry representing 8.1% of total EU greenhouse gas
emissions in 202211 as well as being a large source of air pollutants.12 However, the current
economic context – characterised by low returns on capital, recent margin compression
due to global overcapacity, lack of customer willingness to pay a clean premium and
insufficient incentives through regulatory intervention – makes it more difficult for the EU
metals industries to invest in decarbonisation. As a result, the commercial and financial
business case is not sufficient to attract investors and customers. Without robust action
and investment, the risk of plant closures and industry decline remains real, with serious
consequences for key economic regions across Europe, as well as for our strategic sectors
such as defence and space industries, limiting their ability to deliver critical capabilities
and equipment with the flexibility and speed required in a fast-changing geopolitical
context.

Location of steel and non-ferrous metals sites among the top 100 greenhouse gas emitting sites in
the EU. Source: JRC, Energy and Industry Geography Lab

For example, ThyssenKrupp announced plans for 11,000 lay-offs in Germany in December
2024. In November 2024, ArcelorMittal has postponed its decarbonisation investments
across Europe. Additionally, Liberty Ostrava announced bankruptcy in Czech Republic in
June 2024. The aluminium sector is a warning sign of de-industrialisation risk, as it has
permanently lost a significant part of its European production capacity. In addition, more
than 50% of primary production capacity has been idled since 2021. At the same time, EU
steel output has been declining since 2017, from 160 million tonnes to 126 million tonnes
in 2023. The current steel capacity utilisation rate of approximately 65% is unsustainable
(10) Here, the term “metals” also includes important uses of metals as their inorganic compounds including
(for example) battery materials, photovoltaics and semiconductors
(11) Source – Eurostat, includes mining, manufacture of basic metals and metals processing
(12) Source: Industrial Emissions Portal, 2022.
2

in the long term, as such capital-intensive industries need to run at above 85% capacity to
be competitive under market conditions.
The Clean Industrial Deal13 and the Action Plan for Affordable Energy14 announced
a range of measures and the need for a concrete action plan for the metals sectors. The
focus is on the key competitiveness challenges of lowering energy costs, creating lead
markets for low-carbon products, increasing circularity, levelling the international playing
field, creating quality jobs and leveraging investments. The EU will continue to rely on
strong global partnerships to achieve its clean industrial objectives.
This action plan complements these broader initiatives and sets a comprehensive
work programme for the short to medium term. It builds on the Steel dialogue
convened by the Commission President on 4 March and a wider series of consultations. It
tackles some of the key sector-specific issues preventing Europe’s metals industries to
prosper and decarbonise. It sets out concrete measures, which – combined – can provide
an immediate relief to the metals industries while reassuring them in their decarbonisation
pathways and investment decisions. The transition pathway for the metals sectors,15
published together with this action plan, provides additional background and bottom-up
analysis of the needs and challenges of the metals industries and the views expressed by
the different stakeholders. This action plan will consider ongoing EU partnerships with
third countries, especially candidate countries, as they integrate into the Single Market
and move towards EU membership. A strategic approach to strengthening supply chain
resilience could involve investing in partner countries and redefining industrial
collaborations to create a more sustainable and resilient steel production ecosystem.
This action plan is built around six main pillars: ensuring abundant and affordable clean
energy; preventing carbon leakage; promoting and protecting European industrial
capacities; promoting circularity for metals; defending quality industrial jobs; and derisking through lead markets and support to investments.
1.

ENSURING ACCESS TO CLEAN AND AFFORDABLE ENERGY FOR THE METALS
INDUSTRIES

Energy costs remain the key driver of the metals industries’ competitiveness. Energy
costs represent a larger share of production costs for metals and steel than for other sectors.
Already prior to the energy crisis, this share amounted to about 17% for the steel sector,16
and 40% for aluminium.17 During the energy crisis of 2022, these figures went as high as
80%.18 In 2025, while energy prices decreased since the peak of 2022, they remain higher
than historical levels and vis-à-vis other international manufacturing locations. Electricity
prices are 2-3 times higher in the EU than in the US19, while natural gas prices are nearly
(13) https://commission.europa.eu/topics/eu-competitiveness/clean-industrial-deal_en
(14) https://energy.ec.europa.eu/strategy/affordable-energy_en
(15)
https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/document/download/fe4b7a0b-cfb9-49fd-9d37139c1e23832d_en
(16) https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC121276
(17) https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/sky-high-energy-costs-fan-fire-under-aluminium-zincprices-2022-08-12/
(18) https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/sky-high-energy-costs-fan-fire-under-aluminium-zincprices-2022-08-12/
(19) Electricity prices are 2-3 times US levels: €0.16 per KWh in the EU vs €0.07 in the US in the first half
of 2024 despite having gone down in EU (by €0.04) and remained stable in US (+€0.01) compared to
first half of 2023 and despite decreasing energy needs.
https://www.bruegel.org/policybrief/decarbonising-competitiveness-four-ways-reduce-european-energy-prices
3

five times those in the US.20 Direct electrification remains the most efficient pathway for
decarbonising several forms of steel and metals production, while others will depend on
indirect electrification methods, such as hydrogen produced from electrolysis, increasing
the share of energy costs in total production costs compared with fossil-fuel based
technologies. As such, ensuring access to lower electricity prices is crucial to supporting
this transition. Additionally, technologies such as Carbon Capture and Storage and the
circular use of raw materials are also relevant.
Lowering energy prices for energy-intensive industries
To overcome this challenging situation, energy needs to become more affordable. The
Action Plan for Affordable Energy provides important elements of the solution, notably
by announcing measures to make network charges more efficient, reduce energy taxes and
levies, facilitate Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs), accelerate permitting, expand and
modernise grids and incentivise flexibility in the electricity system. Additionally, energyintensive industries will be among the main beneficiaries of the EIB pilot programme on
corporate PPAs.
Further solutions targeting specifically the energy-intensive industries should be
commensurate to the preeminent role played by energy costs for the competitiveness and
decarbonisation of these industries. The Commission is consulting Member States on a
clean flexibility State aid instrument based on PPAs and industry committing to consume
clean electricity. In addition, the Commission will provide guidance to Member States on
the design of public support schemes for clean energy through two-way contracts for
difference, including their combination with PPAs, in view of providing a temporary price
relief for energy-intensive industries to enable decarbonisation investments in the EU.
Public support in the energy sector should pay particular attention to energy-intensive
industries and the metals sector, especially where electrification technologies are
available, and companies can benefit from these long-term contractual arrangements to
smoothen the impacts of electricity price fluctuations. In doing so, all potential barriers to
the use of PPAs will need to be considered, including potential impacts on companies’
balance sheets21. The Commission will analyse market or regulatory failures preventing
the optimal use of such contracts for energy intensive industries and if necessary, address
them.
In the short term, Member States are also called to rapidly implement and make use
of all the flexibilities provided by the European energy legislation and State aid rules to
lower costs for energy-intensive industries. Section 4.7.1 of the Climate, Environmental
protection and Energy Aid Guidelines allows for reductions in the level of environmental
taxes and parafiscal levies for sectors that would not be able to pursue their economic
activities in a sustainable manner without the reduction, and section 4.11 allows for
reductions of electricity levies for energy-intensive users 22. The steel and metals industries
generally fulfil these conditions. Also, the Energy Taxation Directive allows to decrease
electricity taxation down to zero for energy intensive industries under certain conditions,
which creates an incentive for the sector to decarbonise via electrification and can support
(20) Affordable Energy Action Plan
(21) Ongoing
initiatives
are
working
to
address
some
of
these
issues:
https://www.ifrs.org/projects/completed-projects/2024/power-purchase-agreements/; Power Purchase
Agreements, Endorsement consultation | EFRAG.
(22) For sectors which are at risk of moving outside the Union to locations where environmental disciplines
are absent or less ambitious
4

its broader competitiveness. Member States are also encouraged to urgently conclude the
negotiations on the Energy Taxation Directive23 to make the tax framework more
conducive to electrification and facilitate the transition away from the use of fossil fuels.
The Clean Industrial Deal State aid framework, to be adopted in second quarter of 2025
after a period of consultation24, will provide further flexibilities and simplifications to
enable Member States to accelerate support to industrial decarbonisation. This takes into
account the fact that market and regulatory signals, such as the present and projected ETS
price, are often insufficient on their own to override cost differences between traditional
and decarbonised production methods at this stage. According to the draft currently in
public consultation,25 simplified compatibility conditions will apply to public support for
all decarbonisation technologies, including for energy efficiency measures. This is
expected to lead to cost reductions and increase competitiveness while reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. Simplified schemes based on authorised aid intensities will be
allowed besides schemes based on funding gap calculations or competitive bidding. While
those schemes include aid caps, large projects can also be approved in a streamlined
procedure. Decarbonisation investments will be regarded in a technologically neutral way,
focused on emission reductions, also where these are achieved gradually over time. In
addition to direct decarbonisation investment support, accelerated depreciation of clean
tech assets, such as electrolysers or Carbon Capture Use and Storage equipment, will be
facilitated by the new framework.
The State Aid Guidelines for Emission Trading System (ETS) indirect cost
compensation provide scope for Member States to compensate carbon costs passed-on
through the electricity bills, for certain trade-exposed and carbon-intensive sectors, which
include steel and other metals industries. Member States are encouraged to continue
making use of this possibility, or to consider using it where relevant for their industry
(currently only 14 Member States make use of this possibility). In the context of 2026 ETS
and CBAM reviews, the Commission will work towards ensuring adequate measures
(Guidelines or another form) for indirect ETS cost compensation post-2030, while
ensuring that this is coherent with other means to address carbon leakage.
Furthermore, EU energy regulation provides a framework for the design of network tariffs
based on the principles of cost-reflectiveness, transparency and non-discrimination, while
taking into account the need for network security and flexibility. Member States can design
their network tariffs in a way that benefits energy-intensive industries. To this end, the
Guidance on the design of network tariffs announced in the Action Plan for Affordable
Energy for second quarter of 2025 will provide further detail on solutions to reduce system
costs to the benefit of all users, including for energy-intensive sectors.
Accelerating grid connections and the uptake of renewable and low-carbon
hydrogen
As more and more sectors electrify, and with many network expansion projects delayed,
the metals sector is often faced with long wait times for obtaining or expanding a grid
connection, often several years. Such delays have the potential to derail entire
electrification investments.

(23) COM/2021/563 final
(24) https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/public-consultations/2025-cisaf_en
(25)
https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/document/download/45b532ce-53fb-4907-975c79edaa31a166_en?filename=2025_CISAF_draft_EC_communication.pdf.
5

The Commission will work with Member States to address the problems underlying
long grid connection wait times. The Commission will issue Guidance and
Recommendations to the Member States on shortening the waiting time for grid
connections. This will include measures possible within the existing legal framework and
will help the Member States to remove speculative or immature applications from the
queue, and deviate, where necessary, from first come first served basis, based on objective
criteria, in support of investments beneficial for the clean energy transition and efficiency
of the power system. This will draw on positive existing examples in some Member States
and will be done on the basis of dialogue with Member States’ authorities. The
Commission will also issue guiding principles in second quarter of 2025 identifying
conditions under which anticipatory investments26 in grid projects should be made.
Flexible connection agreements can also provide a means for energy intensive industries
to access the network while these grid investments take place. Furthermore, the
Commission will propose additional measures to facilitate and accelerate access to grid
infrastructure for electrification projects in energy intensive industries.
Since direct electrification is not always possible or cost-effective, hydrogen is a key
enabler of decarbonisation in the steel and metals industries. For example, direct
reduction using hydrogen is the most promising option to decarbonise primary steel
production, and hydrogen is the main contender to provide high-temperature heat in
replacement of natural gas also in other metals industries. To realise a competitive
transition, abundant and affordable supply of renewable and low-carbon hydrogen is
needed. The Commission also announced in the Clean Industrial Deal it would adopt in
the coming weeks the delegated act on low-carbon hydrogen to provide clarity for
suppliers, off-takers and investors. This Delegated Act will present rules that are as flexible
as possible to achieve the desired greenhouse gas emission reduction goals for the
production of low-carbon fuels in a technology neutral way.
Furthermore, the third call under the European Hydrogen Bank announced for third
quarter of 2025 in the Clean Industrial Deal, will continue to support production and
thereby facilitating access for different industrial off-takers, including steel.
In addition, the Commission will reprioritise the mandate of the European Clean
Hydrogen Alliance towards those sectors where hydrogen is most relevant for
decarbonisation efforts. The European Commission will monitor and update the progress
of the Alliance’s project pipeline yearly, to track the scale-up of the hydrogen market and
provide industrial off-takers, amongst others, with the necessary certainty for their
decarbonisation plans.
Accelerating excess heat recovery and clean energy use
Increasing energy efficiency and promoting electrification and the use of clean energy in
the steel and metals sector can deliver benefits to the EU energy system while driving down
costs for the sector. Steel and metals are the industrial sectors with the highest waste heat
recovery potential in the EU, especially as regards high-grade heat resources which can be
recovered flue gases, high-temperature liquids and waste. High-temperature heat pumps
(26) This means investments which anticipate uncertain future electricity demand growth due to
electrification. For such investments, charging the full costs on current users may unfairly burden early
adopters, slowing down electrification. Therefore, the Action Plan for Affordable Energy announces
guidance to explain how, where relevant in targeted cases, Member States could make use of their public
budget to lower network charges to cover the additional costs resulting from measures to accelerate
decarbonisation and market integration.
6

are becoming an increasingly versatile option to utilise excess process heat, thus reducing
the overall energy needs of the sector. Waste heat can also be recovered and used in district
heating networks. The Commission will develop and promote standardised
approaches to waste heat recovery, including to replicate models such as heat purchase
agreements and to scale up best practices on integrated planning of heat infrastructure, as
part of the Heating and Cooling Strategy announced in the Action Plan on Affordable
Energy.
Actions:
In the coming weeks, the Commission will adopt the delegated act on low-carbon
hydrogen.
By Q2 2025, the Commission will issue a Guidance on the design of network tariffs
offering possibilities to, among others, lower network tariffs for the metals sector
and other energy-intensive industries.
By Q2 2025, the Commission will issue guiding principles identifying conditions
under which anticipatory investments in grid projects should be granted.
By Q3 2025, the Commission will open the third call under the Hydrogen Bank,
designed supporting production and thereby facilitating access for industrial offtakers, including steel.
By Q4 2025, the Commission will propose facilitating grid access to energyintensive industry electrification projects.
By Q4 2025, the Commission will provide guidance to Member States on the design
of contracts for difference, including their combination with PPAs.
In the context of 2026 ETS and CBAM reviews, the Commission will work towards
ensuring adequate measures (Guidelines or another form) for indirect ETS cost
compensation post-2030.
2.

PREVENTING CARBON LEAKAGE

To fully achieve its carbon leakage prevention potential, the Carbon Border Adjustment
Mechanism (CBAM)’s financial obligations will enter into application in 2026, in line
with the gradual phase-out of free allowances under the EU ETS by 2034. While
CBAM applies to imported goods, it does not deal with the possible carbon leakage risks
for metals produced in the EU that are subject to the EU ETS price and which are exported
to third countries, competing with producers based in countries with lower climate
ambitions. Therefore, to address this disadvantage, the Commission will propose a solution
to address the risk of carbon leakage for goods produced by CBAM sectors in the EU for
export.
Second, there is a risk that carbon leakage in CBAM-covered goods could shift
further downstream in the value chain. This may occur through circumvention - namely
avoiding the CBAM obligations by making slight modifications to the CBAM basic goods
- or if EU consumers start favouring downstream goods imported from producers in third
countries with weaker climate policies. Additionally, companies that currently
manufacture or process CBAM-related goods in the EU may relocate their operations to
such countries. The Commission is currently quantifying these risks and will make a
proposal extending CBAM to certain downstream products to address them, while also
taking into account the need to minimize the administrative burden.

7

Third, there is a risk of circumvention of CBAM objectives when goods produced in
low-carbon production facilities in third countries are redirected to European customers
while carbon-intensive production continues for other markets (so-called ‘shuffling’).
Similarly, greenwashing can occur through carbon accounting practices, such as energyintensive metals production benefiting from market-based instruments to appear lowcarbon while still relying on high-emission energy sources or misleading scrap content
accounting practices27. To address both issues and ensure the integrity of CBAM, the
Commission will present an anti-circumvention strategy. This strategy will carefully assess
these risks and propose solutions to address them, including legislative amendments.
Considering the urgency to create clarity in this area, the Commission will accelerate the
work on the extension and strengthening CBAM and will frontload key elements of reform.
Actions:
By Q2 2025, the Commission will issue a communication providing analysis and
options on how to address the problem of carbon leakage for CBAM goods
exported from the EU to third countries
By Q4 2025, the Commission will conduct a comprehensive review of CBAM,
accompanied by an anti-circumvention strategy and by a first legislative
proposal:
- extending the scope of CBAM to certain steel and aluminium-intensive
downstream products and
- including additional anti-circumvention measures.
3.

PROMOTING AND PROTECTING EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL CAPACITIES

Global overcapacities severely threaten the profitability and competitiveness of
European industries. The EU has already adopted several trade defence measures in
the metals sectors against unfair global competition. Currently, iron and steel is the
sector with the most trade defence measures in place, followed by the non-ferrous metals
and minerals sector. Nevertheless, the industry remains threatened by global excess
capacities and by global distortions from China and other countries that artificially support
their domestic industries or circumvent EU trade defence measures and sanctions. The EU
is the only major steelmaking region seeing a decrease in capacity.
In addition, the introduction by the US of the 25% import tariffs on steel and
aluminium on 12 March 2025 will not only negatively impact EU producers by limiting
access to the US market, including for base metals processed into further downstream
goods, but will also increase pressure from exports previously destined to the US that could
be redirected to the EU.
Trade defence instruments and other trade measures
The EU has reviewed the existing steel safeguard to address the latest market
developments and ensure the effectiveness of the measure. The Commission carried out a
detailed investigation of the current steel safeguard measure and has made proposals to
Member States for adjusting it to address the challenging situation faced by the EU steel
sector. The proposed adjustments will bring significant short-term relief to EU steel
(27) Indirect emissions under the current CBAM Transitional Period are accounted for in all CBAM sectors.
In the Definitive phase they are only accounted for in fertilisers and cement.
8

producers by ensuring the effectiveness of the measure, particularly in those categories
where import pressure is most acute. In particular, the significant increase in imports
combined with a decrease in demand in certain categories has been taken into account.
The safeguard measure will legally expire on 30 June 2026, yet it is unreasonable to assume
that the structural global overcapacities and their negative trade-related impact on the EU's
steel industry, which triggered the use of the safeguard, will disappear on 1 July 2026. On
the contrary, the negative trade-related effects are likely to be exacerbated, as an increasing
number of third countries are adopting measures aimed at limiting imports into their
markets, resulting in the EU market becoming the main receiving ground of global excess
capacities.
In view of this exceptional situation, it is therefore necessary to introduce an
appropriate and effective protective measures beyond 30 June 2026 that will contribute
to preserving a competitive and sustainable EU steel industry. That is why, by the third
quarter of 2025 at the latest, the Commission will propose a long-term measure providing
a highly effective level of protection to the EU’s steel sector. The Commission will work
to ensure that the new measure is in force in time to replace the current safeguard and
provides the effective degree of remedy against negative trade-related effects caused by
global overcapacities. It will take into account changes in EU demand as well as security
and resilience considerations, while preserving a certain level of openness in the EU
market. This balanced approach will protect the Union interest, including producers and
users, as well as importers and consumers. At the same time, the EU, in accordance with
its international obligations, will continue to engage with its third country and multilateral
partners to address overcapacities at a global level28.
Furthermore, in December 2024, the Commission launched a safeguard investigation
regarding imports of certain alloying elements, a sector critical for the EU economy as
alloys are used to improve the strength, durability and quality of steel or aluminium, which
will be finalised by 18 November 2025. The Commission will not hesitate to take
additional protection measures, should they be considered necessary as a result of this
investigation.
The situation is also deteriorating in the aluminium sector. EU producers lost
substantial market share over the last decade and, in addition, around 50% of primary
production capacity remains curtailed since 2021. The recently announced US tariffs on
aluminium are likely to worsen the situation further given the significant threat of trade
diversion from multiple destinations. This is why the Commission has started to gather
the relevant evidence in view of using the trade defence instruments, including
launching a safeguard measure investigation immediately after the duly
substantiated request is made.
The Commission has observed a growing trend whereby exporting producers attempt
to circumvent the trade defence measures. This behaviour risks undermining the
effectiveness of our TDI measures. This means that while the specific anti-dumping or
anti-subsidy measure adequately addresses the direct imports, the latter can be replaced by
indirect imports whereby the ultimate stage of the production process takes place in a third
country not subject to the measures, before shipment to the EU, avoiding payment of
duties. To ensure the effectiveness of its trade defence measures, as one of the priority
(28) For instance as part of the Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity, a key platform, bringing together 28
members committed to developing and implementing collective solutions to the challenge of excess
capacity and enhance market functioning in the steel sector.
9

actions, the Commission will assess whether it should adapt its practice by introducing
a “melted and poured rule”, which would allow the Commission to act against the
country where the metal was originally melted, regardless of the place of subsequent
transformation and the origin of the good as determined by the traditional non-preferential
rules of origin. Applying this rule would eliminate the possibility to change the origin of
the metal product by performing minimal transformation and give more certainty in
tracing the origin of the product. The Commission will in any case remain vigilant, as
overcapacities generated under non-market conditions may also have the effect of driving
unrelated market-based producers in other third countries to export quantities to the EU
which are displaced from their domestic or other traditional non-European markets.
To address the fast developments in global markets and to protect the industry, the
Commission will strengthen the monitoring of trade flows and will proactively open
investigations based on a “threat of injury”, without waiting for material injury to occur.
Regarding metals subject to the scope of this action plan, other than steel and aluminium,
by third quarter of 2025 the Commission will report on its enhanced monitoring of the
market situation for these sectors and will be ready to propose a trade action as appropriate.
As announced in the Clean Industrial Deal, the Commission will work towards sharpening
the existing Trade Defence Instruments. In this context, the Commission will also assess
whether the current Lesser Duty Rule regime requires changes. The EU will continue
and intensify its efforts in the multilateral context to address the global challenges faced
by these sectors. The situation in the copper sector will be the object of close monitoring
as in February 2025, the US opened an investigation, under Section 232 of the 1962 Trade
Expansion Act, into copper imports, which could lead to further tariff measures and
disruption of global markets. As such, European Member States, although not major
suppliers to the US market, could see indirect implications.
Since March 2022 the EU has adopted a wide range of sanctions on Russia as a
response to its war of aggression against Ukraine, with the aim of weakening Russia’s
economic base, depriving it of critical technologies and markets, and significantly
curtailing its ability to wage war. These sanctions include import restrictions on iron and
steel, which are one of the most stringent sets of sectoral sanctions applicable on Russia.
In addition to the prohibition for imports of processed aluminium goods from Russia,
already in place, the 16th package of sanctions against Russia (adopted on 24 February
2025) includes a ban on EU imports of primary aluminium from Russia, with a quota
mechanism to ensure a smooth transition for business. The Commission will ensure the
effective implementation of these sanctions and, if needed, the EU will impose further
measures to address their circumvention.
The targeted revision of the EU’s rules on chemicals (REACH) in fourth quarter of 2025
will contribute to simplifying rules for the chemicals industry without compromising on
safety and environmental protection. In doing so, this revision will work to ensure a stable
and predictable regulatory environment for metals to be produced in the EU and placed on
the EU market.
Actions:
The Commission has proposed adjustments to the steel safeguard to enter into force
on 1 April 2025. The measure will be tightened to ensure the effectiveness of the
measure and to address the latest market developments.

10

The Commission stands ready to make use of the trade defence instruments and to launch
an investigation for safeguards in the aluminium sector immediately after the duly
substantiated request is made.
No later than Q3 2025, the Commission will propose a trade measure replacing the steel
safeguards as of 1 July 2026, providing a highly effective level of protection against
negative trade-related effects caused by global overcapacities.
The Commission will conduct the ferroalloys safeguards investigation expeditiously,
latest by 18 November 2025.
The Commission will assess the introduction of the rule of “melted and poured” to
trace the country where the metal good was originally melted and poured.

4.

PROMOTING CIRCULARITY FOR METALS

Enhancing circularity is an important pathway for the decarbonisation of metal
industries. For example, recycling can save up to 95% and 80% of the energy required for
primary aluminium and steel production, respectively. Recycling scrap generated in the
EU also allows to reduce dependencies of the EU industry on imported primary raw
materials, such as bauxite/alumina/aluminium recognised as an EU strategic raw material,
and where demand is expected to significantly increase.
However, the volume of scrap used for recycling in the EU is diminishing. It is due to
two factors: a lack of demand from the EU industry (especially for steel) and higher prices
for scrap paid by steel and aluminium producers in third countries, often due to trade
distortions, e.g. subsidies, or unfair market conditions. As a result, ferrous scrap exports
have more than doubled over the last few years, reaching a maximum of 19.43 million
tonnes in 2021 (about 20% of total scrap generated in the EU). A new record for European
aluminium scrap is expected to be set in 2024, with aluminium scrap exports expected to
exceed 1.3 million tonnes.
To reverse this trend, the first objective is to stimulate demand, by increasing the use
of such resources in the EU. To achieve this, scrap should be better sorted and treated to
ensure its usability in high-quality applications such as automotive. This shift requires
investments from recyclers and off-takers, as well as incentives at both the EU and national
levels29, and design requirements for relevant product groups. To facilitate the uptake of
secondary content in such sectors traditionally dependent on primary metals, the
Commission will prepare the setting of targets for recycled steel and aluminium in key
sectors in a cost-effective way, bearing in mind in its analysis the differing ability to pass
on costs to customers and the global competition. The feasibility study for such uptake in
the automotive sector will be completed by the end of 2026 as part of the End-of-Life
Vehicles Regulation currently under co-decision.
The Commission will also assess the need for recyclability and/or recycled content
requirements for additional product groups, as well as for prioritising product design and
waste treatment features that facilitate the separation of copper components from steel and
(29) Section 4.4 of the Guidelines on State aid for climate, environmental protection and energy allows for
State aid for resource efficiency and towards a circular economy: EUR-Lex - 52022XC0218(03) - EN EUR-Lex
11

aluminium fractions. This will be addressed through requirements in delegated acts for
relevant product groups under the Ecodesign for Sustainable Products Regulation and other
relevant legislation (Construction Products Regulation, End-of-Life Vehicles Regulation,
Circular Economy Act).
Increasing the share of secondary metals production implies a shift in certain
production paradigms and business models. In compliance with antitrust rules, actors
along the value chain should collaborate better to make this a reality and overcome the
lock-in into established business models. The Commission will therefore involve all
relevant stakeholders to discuss recyclability and recycled content obligations and other
related issues. This dialogue will allow the Commission to support the preparation of the
Circular Economy Act planned for fourth quarter of 2026, as well as, where relevant, in
the implementation of the Ecodesign for Sustainable Products Regulation30 and other
appropriate frameworks.
Second, working to increase domestic demand for metal scrap can only be effective if the
international playing field remains fair. Acting on supply is equally necessary to ensure
access to scrap for EU producers, while maintaining the business case for recyclers.
The revised Waste Shipment Regulation31 provides new tools ensuring that the export of
waste, including metal scrap, does not cause damages to the environment and human health
in third countries, and the Commission will make use of such tools for metals scrap waste.
An important number of third countries do not allow metal scrap to be exported to the EU,
thereby reducing access to this strategic secondary raw material. Certain countries also
apply unfair subsidies to support their metal recycling and production industries. That is
why the Commission is monitoring the situation and will consider proposing, by third
quarter of 2025 at the latest, a trade measure if necessary to ensure sufficient availability
of scrap in the EU, and in that process it will also assess the rationale and possibility of
introducing a reciprocity rule that would be compliant with the EU’s international
obligations.
Within the single market, metal scrap should circulate freely, to ensure that it can be
recycled in the most performant facilities and to make use of economies of scale. For
certain types of scrap, however, barriers persist due to non-harmonised waste classification
systems. The Circular Economy Act, announced for fourth quarter of 2026, will further
improve the functioning of secondary raw material markets and create a single market for
waste. In this context, the Commission will also examine whether additional measures,
such as export fees or export duties, are necessary to promote the availability of scrap in
the EU generated with high environmental and social standards and prevent the potential
“scrap leakage” to third countries with lower standards.
Improving single market functioning for the metals sector also requires improving the role
of standardisation. For instance, through standardisation, the promotion of high-strength
steel, the reuse of structural steel or the valorisation of steel by-products could be

(30) The first Ecodesign for Sustainable Products‘ work programme is expected for adoption in coming
weeks.
(31) REGULATION 2024/1157, available here: Regulation - EU - 2024/1157 - EN - EUR-Lex
12

facilitated. The classifications of scrap qualities should also be refined to facilitate better
matching of supply of secondary raw materials with the demand in the EU.
Actions:
By Q3 2025 at the latest, the Commission will consider trade measures to ensure
sufficient availability of scrap.
By Q4 2026, present the feasibility study on the recycled content obligations
for steel and aluminium under the End-of-Life Vehicles Regulation.
By Q4 2026, prepare for the introduction of recycled content obligations for
aluminium in relevant construction products and enhance the market for
secondary raw materials in the EU as part of the Circular Economy Act.
By Q4 2026, propose a Circular Economy Act to further improve the
functioning of secondary raw material markets and create a single market for
waste.
Assess the feasibility of introducing recyclability and/or recycled content
requirements obligations for steel, aluminium and copper in specific products
under ESPR.
5.

DEFENDING QUALITY INDUSTRIAL JOBS

With this action plan, the European Commission is mobilising all its tools at the service of
a strong, prosperous and resilient steel and metals sector, ensuring its long-term
sustainability and the prosperity of its workforce. We do it to promote and protect quality
industrial jobs, with decent pay and transparent and predictable working conditions and
high health and safety standards.
Europe has a longstanding tradition of steel production, with steelworkers playing a key
role in the foundation of European manufacturing. Upholding these high-skill quality jobs
that provide decent pay, strong labour protections, and high health and safety standards is
essential to sustaining the sector’s competitiveness and high social value.
Upholding EU legislation on workers’ rights, particularly regarding information and
consultation, is essential, especially as the steel sector undergoes profound transformation
due to the green and digital transitions. Continuously supporting and strengthening social
dialogue is key to managing the transition effectively, ensuring trade unions and employer
organizations have a central role, fostering inclusive decision-making and securing a fair
and sustainable future for workers and the industry alike.
Additionally, active labour market policies should also play a crucial role in ensuring
a just transition by equipping workers with the skills needed for emerging industries,
facilitating job-to-job transitions through targeted reskilling and placement services, and
supporting entrepreneurship, particularly for young workers, women, older employees, and
those from underrepresented regions. The Commission recently presented the Union of
Skills, which aims to create skills for quality jobs, upskill and reskill the workforce as job
requirements change, and circulate skills across the EU. The Pact for Skills, in particular

13

the Large-Scale Partnership for Energy-intensive Industries (includes steel and metal) (32),
will also be relevant in this context.
Furthermore, to ensure better support for workers affected by the transitions, and as already
announced in the Automotive Action Plan, the Commission will propose in spring 2025 a
targeted amendment to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund Regulation to
extend the possibility of support to companies in restructuring processes to protect
employees against the risk of unemployment. Also, to help Member States and sectoral
partners make even better use of the opportunities offered by the European Social Fund+,
the Commission will actively engage with them to draw attention to the opportunities
offered by ESF+, and to bring actors together.
More broadly, the European Commission will continue to support social partners to ensure
a just and fair transition of the steel and metals sectors, in particular in the most affected
regions, building on the lessons learned and success of the Just Transition Fund. This
requires an all-encompassing, flexible and integrated approach to helping workers, their
families, and their communities to ensure that no worker or region in the EU is left behind,
a vital condition to maintain public support for the clean transition.
The European Fair Transition Observatory and the Quality Jobs Roadmap
announced in the Clean Industrial Deal will be instrumental in monitoring the employment
impacts of the transition. To ensure a fair an inclusive process, employers must integrate
just transition principles into all industrial transformation projects, safeguarding workers'
rights and securing quality jobs for the future
Actions:
In spring 2025, amendment to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund
Regulation.
European Fair Transition Observatory will be monitoring the employment
impacts of the transition.

6.

DE-RISKING DECARBONISATION PROJECTS THROUGH LEAD MARKETS AND PUBLIC
SUPPORT

Many decarbonisation investments in the metals industry are currently not economically
profitable. The savings in the short term in carbon costs are generally outweighed by the
higher capital and operational expenditure, due to high technology costs and higher cost of
energy carriers such as renewable and low-carbon hydrogen. Low-carbon metals will
remain more expensive than their conventionally produced alternatives for the foreseeable
future. To minimise public support needs, it is essential for metals producers to obtain a
green premium.
Working on lead markets
Lead markets, both public and private, will show the way for a broader adoption of
low-carbon metals as the market standard. In these market segments, notably those
(32) https://pact-for-skills.ec.europa.eu/about/industrial-ecosystems-and-partnerships/energy-intensiveindustries-large-scale-partnerships_en
14

where public procurement, subsidies or regulatory incentives play a role in shaping the
market, targeted requirements or incentives would create reliable demand that can be
served by low-carbon metals produced in Europe.
As announced in the Clean Industrial Deal, the Commission will propose as part of the
Industrial Decarbonisation Accelerator Act to introduce resilience and sustainability
criteria to foster clean European supply for energy-intensive sectors. These criteria
(e.g. clean, resilient, circular, cybersecure) will strengthen demand for EU-made clean
products, building on the experience of the Net Zero Industry Act for clean tech, promoting
innovation as well as EU environmental and social standards, and will ensure a level
playing field. This could widen the application of non-price criteria to the EU budget,
national support programmes as well as public (and in some circumstances, private)
procurement, to the benefit of energy-intensive industries. The steel and metals industries,
as well as their downstream industries – automotive, construction, machinery – will be
considered among the sectors of application and the competitiveness of the entire supply
chains will also be assessed in the design of EU and national support programmes.
To enable the industries investing in decarbonisation to reap the “green premium”, the
Industrial Decarbonisation Accelerator Act will develop a voluntary label on the carbon
intensity of industrial products, while avoiding duplication, based on a simple
methodology with ETS data and building on the CBAM methodology. This should be the
basis for further engagement with international work on measuring carbon intensity. In the
interest of speed, the Commission will start with steel in 2025. This will be based on
existing reporting from industry, or, where available, common methodology.
In parallel, the Commission will continue working on developing comprehensive lifecycle assessments to improve the sustainability of products. Regarding steel, the
Ecodesign for Sustainable Product Regulation will complement the Industrial
Decarbonisation Accelerator Act’s label by developing requirements for products with
high steel content and add relevant environmental criteria beyond the carbon footprint.
This would allow consumers to see the environmental footprint of relevant products.
Derisking high investment costs projects
Acting on all the above barriers will already help increase the business case. However,
both public and private support to investments is necessary to ensure the transition, boost
competitiveness, and ensure value chain resilience. This is required to address the scissors
effect linked to global overcapacity often triggered by unfair trading practices, and to
higher energy costs than most international competitors. In certain cases, such as nickel,
price fluctuations driven by the influence of geopolitical competitors, pose a threat to
investment security. In order to prevent this and to ensure that the European industry
benefits from sustainably produced critical raw materials, we will pursue the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the Critical Raw Materials Act and work
closely together with the third partner countries to implement the ESG related pillar from
our Strategic Partnerships on raw materials value chains. We will continue the joint work
in international fora such as G7 on promoting economic security standards for CRM, and
nickel in particular.
High capital costs are often combined with significantly higher operating costs for
low carbon production processes and clean energy. According to industry estimates, the
annual financial needs to decarbonise the steel industry are estimated at EUR 5.2 billion
15

for capital expenditures and EUR 9 billion for operational expenditures until 203033. For
the non-ferrous metals, the aluminium industry estimates annual investment needs of
approximately EUR 1.3 billion until 2050 to decarbonise the sector, while for copper this
corresponds to approximately EUR 211.5 million until 2050. Most of these projects are
not likely to be economically feasible in the current environment and would require public
funding to overcome technological and environmental externalities.
The EU has already been quite active in supporting such projects. From October 2022
to February 2025, the Commission approved close to EUR 9 billion of State aid for 10
individual steel decarbonisation projects. Several steel decarbonisation projects also
received support through the EU Innovation Fund. Further projects received support based
on decarbonisation support schemes open to all energy-intensive sectors. The Commission
has approved a number of such industrial decarbonisation support schemes including in
the form of carbon contracts for difference34 for several Member States and the
Commission will provide guidance on how such type of support schemes can best be
structured in line with State aid rules. Recent examples of approved schemes which will
or can also benefit the steel industry are two Slovak schemes with a total budget of EUR
1.1 billion, a EUR 550 million Italian scheme, a EUR 4 billion German scheme, a EUR 3
billion French scheme, a EUR 2.7 billion Austrian scheme and a EUR 2.5 billion Czech
scheme. Moreover, additional projects have been financed by the EU 35, including in view
of increasing the efficiency in the use of raw materials and energy.
To attract more private finance, additional public support will be required, from innovation
to scale-up and deployment, while maintaining the level playing field across the single
market.
At the innovation stage, the Research Fund for Coal and Steel (RFCS) provides important
funding for the steel sector, supporting the transition to clean steel and the overall industrial
decarbonisation of the sector. The Commission will launch flagship initiatives which
would mobilise EUR 150 million in 2026 and 2027 and could also contribute to
strengthening the European defence research dimension of the sector. In addition, the
Commission will propose an overall reform of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel,
to simplify and further accelerate investments in steel research, including research on
defence applications.
Furthermore, as announced in the Clean Industrial Deal, there will be a flagship Horizon
Europe call of ca. EUR 600 million under the 2026-2027 work programme to support fitfor-deployment projects, including in the steel and metals industry.
This call will be complementing ongoing research efforts funded under Horizon Europe
on decarbonisation including recycling technologies to improve the circularity of metals
in the EU.
The European Innovation Centre for Industrial Transformation and Emissions
INCITE established under the EU Industrial Emissions Directive will accelerate the takeup of green technologies for industrial transformation. INCITE’s findings will be designed

(33) https://www.eurofer.eu/issues/climate-and-energy/maps-of-key-low-carbon-steel-projects
(34) in which support is paid per tonne of greenhouse gas avoided during the operation of a low-carbon plant
after deduction of the carbon price
(35) e.g. LIFE16 ENV/ES/000242 LIFE-2-ACID, LIFE16 ENV/IT/000231 LIFE 4GreenSteel, LIFE19
CCM/IT/001334 LIFE HEATLEAP
16

to inform financial support and investment decisions of public authorities, the financial
sector and private investors.
At scale-up stage, the Commission announced as part of the Clean Industrial Deal an
Industrial Decarbonisation Bank aiming for EUR 100 billion in funding based on
available funds in the Innovation Fund, additional revenues resulting from parts of the ETS
as well as the revision of InvestEU. The Commission will launch a pilot auction with EUR
1 billion on the decarbonisation of key industrial processes across various sectors,
including steel and metals, in 2025, supporting industrial decarbonisation and
electrification with existing resources under the Innovation Fund. Member States are
encouraged to combine support under the Innovation Fund with auctions-as-a-service.
Across funding programmes, attention will be paid to simplifying funding conditions, in
order to reduce the effort and expertise required to apply for public support. This will help
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the sector also have access to these funding
programmes.
Supporting concrete projects through the Critical Raw Materials Act
Aluminium, copper and nickel, as well as many steel alloying elements, are at the same
time critical raw materials. They therefore benefit from the provisions of the Critical Raw
Materials Act, which seeks to unlock the EU’s raw materials potential along the entire
value chain, from exploration to extraction to processing to recycling. The Commission
will announce the first round of selected Strategic Projects in March 2025, including
for aluminium, copper and nickel, in the EU Member States and partner third
countries. These will benefit from streamlined permitting procedures, and the
Commission will work with Member States, public and private financial institutions to
ensure access to funding for such projects, as well as to identify off-takers when relevant.
Furthermore, the Commission seeks to increase the stability of raw materials markets, to
prevent excessive price fluctuations that could put European projects at risk. The
demand/supply matchmaking aggregation platform to be launched this year could also
benefit the base metals sectors, increasing business opportunities and providing additional
long-term certainty for transactions.
Working on regulatory simplification
Furthermore, the steel and metals sectors are among the most extensively regulated
industrial sectors in the EU. The regulatory burden faced by such companies exercises
important pressures on their resources, taking time away from their core business
objectives, especially for SMEs. Addressing this constraint is important for the
competitiveness of the EU steel and metals sectors. On 26 February 2025, the Commission
has adopted the first two new proposals, so-called Omnibus packages, of simplification
measures that will cut red tape and simplify EU rules. Additional ones will be adopted this
year.
Actions:
In Q4 2025, the Commission will propose as part of the Industrial
Decarbonisation Accelerator Act to introduce resilience and sustainability
criteria to strengthen production of EU-made clean products.

17

In Q4/2025, the Commission will propose a reform of the Research Fund for
Coal and Steel.
In 2025, in view of the future Industrial Decarbonisation Bank, the Commission
will launch a EUR 1 billion pilot auction supporting industrial decarbonisation
and electrification of key industrial processes across various sectors, using a
combination of existing resources under the Innovation Fund, thus also
facilitating the electrification of steel and metal industrial processes. Member
States are encouraged to combine support under the Innovation Fund with
auctions-as-a-service.
In 2026 and 2027 the Commission will launch flagship calls under the Research
Fund for Coal and Steel.

7.

WORKING TOGETHER ON IMPLEMENTATION FOR A FAIR TRANSITION

Addressing competitiveness, social and decarbonisation challenges for the metals industry
will require close and more intense interaction of all stakeholders. The Commission will
continuously monitor the situation in the sector, its resilience and ongoing decarbonisation
and of the possible policy adjustments needed, in dialogue with the sector, social partners
and the co-legislators.
The implementation of the transition pathway for the metals sectors will provide a
constant space for dialogue between the industry, trade unions and other stakeholders. The
mandate of the High-Level Group on Energy-intensive Industries will be renewed for
another 4-year period to enable this implementation. It will provide a platform for
monitoring latest developments on issues linked to competitiveness and decarbonisation
of the metal industry such as energy costs, skills needs and global overcapacities.
The steel and metals sectors are indispensable to Europe’s industrial fabric, to our
resilience, economic security, defence and social stability. The Commission calls on the
European Parliament, the Council, and all relevant stakeholders to work together on the
implementation of this action plan to ensure we maintain and enhance production
capacities in Europe and secure steady and reliable supply for our key industries, including
defence.

18

