EU-China Summit: new steps in a growing relationship
At the 7th Annual EU-China Summit, which takes place on 8 December in The Hague, the European Union and China will further strengthen their maturing strategic partnership. The EU will raise topics including the fight against illegal migration, and human rights, and discussions will also focus on economic issues including the Doha Development Round, Textiles and other trade concerns. A number of international issues including North Korea and Burma/ Myanmar will also feature. A joint declaration will be signed on non-proliferation and arms control and agreements will also be concluded on customs co-operation, and science and technology. It is hoped that agreement can also be reached on joint research on the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The European Commission will be represented by President José Manuel Barroso, Commissioner for External Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, and Commissioner for External Trade, Peter Mandelson. The Chinese delegation will be led by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao.

Prior to the Summit, Commission President José Manuel Barroso commented:

“We are at a dynamic moment in our relationship with China. Our Chinese partners have acknowledged the importance of the EU as a strategic partner and our relationship is growing in the political as well as trade fields. Developing this relationship will be one of our top foreign policy objectives in the years to come”.

The Summit will reflect the fact that the EU's dialogue with China now covers all the essential areas of a modern partnership, from security issues such as non-proliferation and the fight against terror, to trade and economic co-operation, science and technology and the environment, as well as sensitive questions like human rights. Given the breadth of our common agenda, the two sides will therefore explore the possibility of concluding a new EU-China framework agreement in the coming year. A wide range of agreements will be signed at the summit. See MEMO/04/284: EU-China Summit: Agreements to be signed on 8 December.

Main issues to be discussed at the summit include:

The EU's wish to begin negotiations as soon as possible for a Readmission agreement to cover illegal immigration
The Chinese desire to see the EU's arms embargo lifted
The prospects for improved co-operation on human rights
China's implementation of its WTO commitments, the international Doha Round of WTO negotiations, the abolition of textiles quotas end 2004, and new mechanisms for further economic and sectoral co-operation between the EU and China
China's request to the EU to be granted full market economy status. A Joint Working Group has recently held its first meeting to discuss progress in solving this technical issue.
In 2004 - designated “the year of Europe in China” - the EU has enjoyed an unprecedented number of contacts with China, including PM Wen's visit to Brussels. Following the Enlargement on May 1st, the EU has become China's largest trading partner and China is now the EU's second largest commercial partner. 2004 has seen operations begin under the new Galileo Satellite Navigation agreement and the entry into force of the milestone “Tourism Agreement” (formally known as the Approved Destination Status Agreement) which will facilitate visits to Europe by Chinese tourists.

The range of nearly 20 EU-China sectoral “dialogues” (from Intellectual Property Right Protection and industrial policy to civil aviation and environmental protection) will soon expand to include social security and employment, economic issues, and the regulation of financial markets.

