EU-China Summit

The 5th Annual EU-China Summit will take place on 24th September in Copenhagen. Discussions will cover a wide range of topics including EU-China relations, political dialogue and human rights, commercial relations and co-operation on economic and social reform, transnational matters such as the fight against illegal migration and trafficking in human beings and the environment. The two sides will also brief each other on developments in their own regions, with a particular emphasis on EU integration and the enlargement process, and the implementation of China's ongoing economic and social reform process. The Summit comes at a moment of transition in Chinese politics, with the hand-over of power to a new leadership generation expected to follow the 16th Congress of the Communist Party in November.

On the eve of the Summit, External Relations Commissioner Chris Patten underlined the importance of the EU-China relationship saying: "China represents between a fifth and a quarter of humanity and Chinese success is good for all of us. The EU is keen to see China take its full place in the institutions of global governance, and its entry into the WTO is an excellent development from this point of view. The EU has been engaged for some time in consultations with China on illegal migration and trafficking in human beings. We must continue to engage China across the whole international multilateral agenda, including a continuing dialogue on human rights."

Participants

The European Union will be represented by the Danish Prime Minister, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, in his role as the President of the European Council, and the President of the European Commission, Romano Prodi. The Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Per Stig Møller, the European Commissioner for External Relations, Chris Patten, and the European Commissioner for Trade, Pascal Lamy, will also participate.

Chinese participants will be led by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who will be accompanied by a delegation of Ministers, Vice-Ministers and officials, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tang Jiaxuan, and the Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation, Shi Guangsheng.

Political dialogue and human rights

The summit will welcome the recent agreement between the EU and China to strengthen political dialogue, inter alia in the area of non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control. The aim should now be to ensure that this is fully implemented, resulting in substantive exchanges at all levels.

The EU will also underline the continued need for an open and productive EU-China Human Rights Dialogue, and raise issues of particular concern to the EU in this area.

Commercial relations and co-operation on economic and social reform

The EU welcomes China's accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and underlines the importance of bilateral trade and investment flows. EU-Chinese co-operation in the WTO are of high importance, in order to make negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda a success, as well as the full implementation by China of its WTO commitments. The EU will continue to support China in this area and in the field of economic and social reforms through EU co-operation programmes and bilateral dialogue. Finally the EU will express the wish to resolve recent food and consumer safety problems as quickly as possible.

The EU will press for the speedy launch of negotiations on an agreement on Authorised Destination Status with China, in order to pave the way for more Chinese tourists to visit Europe, and thus promote people-to-people contacts between China and the EU.

Transnational issues

The EU will stress the need for further co-operation both to combat illegal migration and trafficking in human beings, as well as in the environmental field. EU assistance programmes will complement dialogue in this area.

Regional issues

The summit will explore how the EU and China can contribute to the resolution of regional conflicts, e.g. through the support of the reconciliation process on the Korean peninsula and the peace process in the Middle East, and by giving special attention to the domestic evolution in Afghanistan as well as developments in India-Pakistan relations.

Background information

The first EU-China Annual Summit took place in London in April 1998. The second and the third summit took place in Beijing, in December 1999 and October 2000, and the fourth in Brussels in September 2001. These Summits have proved to be important meetings for political leaders to update each other on progress made in numerous areas, to exchange ideas and to plan for the future.

In May 2001, the European Commission issued a Communication on China entitled, "The EU Strategy towards China: Implementation of the 1998 Communication and Future Steps for a more Effective EU Policy". This outlines ways to strengthen EU-China relations through a number of concrete measures. The Communication was endorsed by the General Affairs Council Conclusions of 25 June 2001. These documents provide a roadmap for the development of EU-China relations over the coming years, which continues to be valid.