EU–China talks focus on Doha, market access, intellectual property rights
Chinese Trade Minister Bo Xilai met with Commissioner for Trade Peter Mandelson and Commissioner for External Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy Benita Ferrero-Waldner in Brussels today. In bilateral meetings and a formal sitting of the EC-China Economic and Trade Joint Committee, the Commission and Chinese representatives discussed all aspects of the ever-increasing relationship between China and the EU, with particular attention to economic and trade matters. Talks focused on intensive cooperation between the Commission and China in the twenty ongoing technical ‘dialogues' in areas ranging from the environment and energy to education and intellectual property rights. Talks with Commissioner Mandelson focussed on the Doha Round; market access for EU businesses in China; the protection of intellectual property rights in China and China's progress towards Market Economy Status.

Speaking after the meeting EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson said: “This has been an important year in EU-China trade relations. EU-China trade is likely to continue to break records in 2005. China represents a formidable challenge to Europe but it is also a growing market for the products Europe produces best. Today's talks have reinforced the need for greater ambition from both sides, but also our mutual commitment to ensuring that competition and cooperation continue to go hand in hand.”

EU External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero Waldner said: "In addition to the political, economic and trade aspects of our relationship, our co-operation stretches into areas as diverse as environment, energy and transport. The work we do together in areas such as these makes an important contribution, firstly to China's transformation process, but also to securing better living conditions of millions of European and Chinese citizens".

Competition and cooperation

The Commission and China are committed to working together to improve access for EU companies to the Chinese market, and to improve the protection of intellectual property rights in China to give extra confidence to EU investors. Today's discussions addressed the issue of high Chinese tariffs on Europe automobile parts – an important problem for EU exporters.

The Commission also continues to work with China to ensure it meets the technical criteria for Market Economy Status. Substantial progress towards Market Economy Status has been made, and at the EU-China Summit in September it was decided to upgrade our dialogues on this issue. Today the Commission proposed to intensify discussions on this issue.

As one of the world's most advanced developing countries and a powerful exporter, China also has a crucial leadership role to play in the Doha Development round of trade talks. Today the EU and China discussed the EU's recent offer on agricultural market access and their mutual interest in balanced and ambitious progress in all areas of negotiation to ensure a successful Ministerial meeting in Hong Kong.

During the Joint Committee Commissioner Mandelson and Minister Bo discussed EU enlargement and initialled a bilateral Agreement on a package of measures to compensate China on products where EU enlargement resulted in losses to Chinese exporters. Both sides noted that this was a deal that fully reflected the WTO rules on this, and that benefited both the EU and China in a balanced way.

The Commission plans to produce a Communication on Europe's trading relationship with China early in 2006. The Commission and China have agreed to consider ways in which a new Framework Agreement between the EU and China could better reflect the economic and strategic changes in Europe's relationship with China over the last two decades.

A booming trade relationship – a successful strategic partnership

EU-China trade is likely to reach another record in 2005 - €200 billion, up from €175 billion in 2004. 12.5% of EU imports, worth 127 billion euros, come from China. 90% of EU imports from China are manufactured goods – about half of all imports are machinery and vehicles. Europe is China's largest trading partner.

China receives about 5% of EU exports, worth 48 billion euros. The biggest European exporters to China are Germany (21 billion euro), France (5.4 billion euro) and Italy (4.4 billion euro). These exports are focused on manufactured goods – including textiles.

European exports to China are growing fast, particularly in areas such as luxury goods – in which Europe has 25% of the Chinese market

