1.CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

•Reasons for and objectives of the proposal

The aim of the present proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council is to protect the interests of the Union and its Member States by enabling the Union to respond to economic coercion. Economic coercion refers to a situation where a third country is seeking to pressure the Union or a Member State into making a particular policy choice by applying, or threatening to apply, measures affecting trade or investment against the Union or a Member State. The Union response, or its mere availability, aims to dissuade third countries from engaging in economic coercion, in the first place, or to dissuade them from continuing the economic coercion, if economic coercion occurs. As a last resort, the Union may counteract the economic coercion. The Union response may take the form of a broad range of measures, following a determination of an act as coercive, including efforts to enter in consultations with the third country concerned to facilitate an agreed or adjudicated solution, where possible, a variety of countermeasures and international cooperation.

The present proposal aims to remedy a legislative gap to address the evolving issue of economic coercion. The Union currently does not have a legislative framework for acting against economic coercion. None of the existing legal instruments addresses the issue of economic coercion.

At the same time, there is an increasing and significant use of economic coercion by third countries that threatens to undermine the rights and interests of the Union and Member States. The sources of economic coercion are multiple and are of a broad concern.

The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission adopted a Joint Declaration  in which they recognised that actions by third countries that seek to coerce the Union or a Member State to take or withdraw particular policy measures were of concern. 1 The Joint Declaration contains the Commission’s commitment to make a legislative proposal for an instrument to deter and counteract economic coercion by the end of 2021 at the latest. The European Parliament and the Council committed to consider the proposal in a timely manner.