Progress in EU-China relations at summit in Beijing

At the 6th Annual EU-China Summit, which takes place on 30 October in Beijing, the European Union and China intend to conclude two major new cooperation agreements on satellite navigation and tourism facilitation and a new dialogue on industrial policy. The parties will discuss topics including human rights, the fight against illegal migration, trade and investment relations, technical cooperation and international concerns.

Ahead of the Summit, President Romano Prodi said “EU-China relations have expanded rapidly in recent years. As the EU enlarges and China continues to emerge on the world stage, our bilateral and international agenda is more challenging than ever and this summit affords a major opportunity to move forward together."

It is intended to conclude two major agreements at the summit, opening new areas of cooperation between the EU and China. The agreement on Galileo would enable China to participate in this strategic European satellite navigation programme, notably through a substantial financial stakeholding in the Galileo joint undertaking. The agreement on Authorised Destination Status would facilitate visa procedures for group travel from China. This would allow more Chinese tourists to visit the Union which will promote people-to-people contacts between China and the EU.

The newly established dialogue on industrial policy will also be concluded at the summit. This dialogue aims at ensuring a business-friendly level playing field for industrial operations and at contributing to smooth and sustainable trade relations between the EU and China. The EU will also express its desire to start negotiations on a customs cooperation agreement.

The summit will welcome the recent release of both EU and China policy papers on EU-China relations, which provide the way ahead for the development of relations in the years to come. This is China's first ever policy paper on the relations with EU, something which we have recognised as testimony to the importance attached by China to our relationship.

The EU side will underline the need to reinforce the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue and make it more results-oriented and raise issues of particular concern to the EU in the field of human rights. Leaders will exchange views on how the EU and China can contribute to the resolution of regional conflicts, notably through supporting efforts to counter proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the Korean peninsula and to promote the peace process in the Middle East. Special attention will also be paid to the current political situation in Burma/Myanmar as well as to the international cooperation for the reconstruction of Iraq. The EU will stress the need for further joint efforts to combat illegal migration and trafficking in human beings, including the need to sign a readmission agreement and for practical cooperation in this field.

The European Union will be represented by the Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, in his role as the President of the European Council, the President of the European Commission, Romano Prodi and the Secretary General of the Council and High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana. The Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Franco Frattini, and the European Commissioner for Trade, Pascal Lamy, will also participate.

The Chinese side will be led by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, who will be accompanied by a delegation of Ministers, Vice-Ministers and officials, including the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Li Zhaoxing, Minister for Science and Technology, Xu Guanhua and Chairman of the National Development and Reform Commission, Ma Kai.

Prior to the Summit, European leaders will have a bilateral meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao.

The summit will be preceded by a meeting of the EU-China Joint Committee at Ministerial level where EU Trade Commissioner Pascal Lamy will have an opportunity to discuss trade issue with his Chinese counterpart. High on the agenda will be a discussion on the implementation by China of WTO commitments as well as the enlargement of the EU and its impact on EU-China trade relations.

Background:

The first EU-China Annual Summit took place in London in April 1998; followed by the second and the third, both in Beijing, in December 1999 and October 2000, and the fourth in Brussels in September 2001. Last summit in September 2002 in Copenhagen reaffirmed both sides' will to reinforce exchanges.

On 10 September 2003, the European Commission issued a Communication on China entitled, “A maturing partnership - Common interests and challenges in EU-China Relations”. This document, which was endorsed by the EU's General Affairs Council of 13 October 2003, charts a course for further deepening of relations in the medium term and includes a number of concrete measures to this end. On the Chinese side, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs published also, on 13 October 2003, its first ever policy paper on the relations with EU, something which we have recognized as testimony to the importance attached by China to our relationship.

China is the EU's third largest trading partner, after the USA and Switzerland. The main EU imports from China consist of machinery, transport equipment, textiles and chemicals.

