Let me begin this whodunnit, against all tradition, by revealing the denouement. It is absurd to think of a single relationship between the EU and a region as diverse as Asia: a region, as Dryden said of George Villiers:

"So various that he seemed to be; Not one, but all mankind's epitome."

One cannot live in Asia as I have without being struck by its astonishing variety. From the teeming billions of China and India to small archipelagos; from military dictatorships to thriving democracies; from Islam to Christianity to Buddhism; from the most densely populated country in the world Singapore to the least Mongolia; from the wealth of a Japan to the penury of a North Korea. The contrast between North and South Korea, indeed, might stand as a paradigm for the variety of the whole were it not for the close kinship between the peoples on that peninsula. Yet Asia is a cornucopia of different races, languages traditions and histories further complicated by the imprint of invasion. The British conquest of parts of the Indian subcontinent , for example, overlay an already subjugated country. The subcontinent had been ruled by the Moghul Empire from 1526 and the Moghuls in turn succeeded Tartar conquerors led by Tamburlane more than a century earlier.

Just as this country was immeasurably enriched by the Norman invasion though it cannot have looked that way to Harold I hope that in the long sweep of history the British will be judged to have brought something valuable to Asia: that the stain of such events as the Opium Wars in China will be effaced by the positive legacy from Pakistan to Hong Kong to Kiribati.

Given the sprawling variety of Asia, it is absurd to think of a monolithic EU-Asia relationship: a single policy or approach, equally valid across the whole region. That may help to explain why, almost exactly one year ago, when the Commission set out a new strategic framework for Europe's relationship with Asia over the coming decade, some critics accused us of being unfocussed.

Let me first summarise what was in the 2001 strategy paper. In part, this answers the charge of lack of focus, because it identifies themes which are equally valid throughout Asia: which serve, as it were, as threads to pull our policy together.

The 2001 Asia Strategy

Last year's paper followed a substantial 1994 initiative that had launched a more comprehensive and forward European policy towards Asia including, for example, new Summit dialogues in the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM), as well as bilateral Summits with China, India, Japan and Korea. Our Ministerial dialogue was also deepened, through EU participation in the ASEAN Regional Forum.

But that initiative was over 7 years ago and if a week is a long time in politics, as Harold Wilson famously said, seven years is an eternity. In Europe, we have seen the single currency and we are on the brink of further enlargement. We have also seen a great increase in the EU's weight as an international player, through development of the Common Foreign and Security Policy as well as plans for the Rapid Reaction Force. Meanwhile, the 1997 crisis precipitated welcome economic and political reforms in Asia. Regional integration has gained a new dynamism with the enlargement of ASEAN to Burma, Cambodia and Laos. And there have been dramatic changes in particular countries not least in Indonesia and in China.

Hence the decision to revisit the Asia strategy for the coming decade. This is no Soviet-style 10-year plan. Rather, it sets out six key objectives for more coherent and balanced relations with Asia and then suggests some specific EU initiatives in Asia's four sub-regions, in the various regional fora, and in particular countries.

Let me briefly review the six objectives:

First, we want to contribute to peace and security in Asia by broadening our engagement with the region.

This is what we have been doing, for example, in East Timor and in North Korea, where we have remained deeply committed to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation (KEDO).

Asia, we must not forget, is the source of some of the world's major tensions and conflicts, whether in Kashmir, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Acheh, Mindanao, across the Taiwan Straits or in the Korean Peninsula. Several Asian states have nuclear capacities, and there are also concerns related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

To contribute to the solution of such problems we need to work in the closest possible co-operation with the countries involved, and through the regional groupings to which they belong.

Second, we want to contribute to the protection of human rights and to the spreading of democracy, good governance and the rule of law.

As I have said on many occasions I utterly reject the idea that such ideas are "Western", and somehow incompatible with "Asian values". More than once during my days in Hong Kong I was afforded the delight of hearing this view propounded by one distinguished person or another. For such speakers, Asian values seemed to exclude democracy, human rights, civil liberties and other such noxious ideas identified with the degenerate West. Personally, I rather enjoyed these moments, as they gave me valuable time (and it was usually a lot of time) to reflect on the issue. Had these speakers never heard of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma, I wondered, a very Asian inspiration to freedom-lovers across the whole world? Had they forgotten the words of Malaysia's Deputy Prime Minister, Anwar Ibrahim, who perhaps in defence of 'Asian values'? is now languishing in a prison cell? In 1994 he argued that calling freedom 'Western or un-Asian is to offend our own traditions as well as our forefathers who gave their lives in the struggle against tyrannies and injustices.'

A meeting of more than one hundred Asian NGOs in Bangkok the year before had concluded that: 'universal human rights standards are rooted in many cultures' . They called for cultural pluralism with the crucial proviso that 'practices which derogate from universally accepted human rights…must not be tolerated'.

Europe today has a relatively better record in the field of human rights than some Asian countries. But we have no reason to feel smug or morally superior about this. Until recently, so-called 'Western values' were almost unheard of in Europe. So how 'Western' can they be? As the great Indian economist and Nobel Prize winner Amartya Sen has pointed out, when European nations still believed in divine right of kings, Indian emperors such as the Moghul Akbar were practising tolerance and defending diversity in India.

The simple fact is that it feels much the same being beaten up by a policeman wherever you live. An Eastern mother is just as devastated as a Western one if her son is locked up without reason or simply disappears in the middle of the night. People everywhere want to be allowed freely to express their opinions, to be respected and to have accountable leaders. These are universal values.

If there are differences in implementation of such values in the East and in the West, I am inclined to put these down to a time lag rather than to profound cultural differences just as Europe, in Mediaeval times, lagged far behind parts of Asia in this respect.

There are solid economic and political arguments for such values, as well as moral ones. Peace, security and prosperity, too, are more likely to flourish in regions where free and fair elections are the norm, where administrations are not blighted with corruption and where laws are not subordinated to the day-to-day whims of those in power. I have long been convinced that businesses that treat their workers well are the most likely to thrive. That is why while I accept the case for safety-nets I tend to be suspicious of complex legislation relating to workers' rights. In the end, the economics do not dictate sweat-shops and exploitation: a 'race to the bottom'. Businesses are far more likely to be successful if they have contented, educated, motivated workforces.

The third key objective in our strategy is to develop trade and investment relations between Europe and Asia.

The main focus here has been on the Doha Development Round where we have worked closely with Asian partners to reduce non-tariff trade barriers, to encourage investment and to support co-operation between economic operators. Europe and Asia have a joint interest in developing and modernising the multilateral trading system embodied in the WTO.

Trade with Asia has expanded substantially in recent years, despite the 1997 crisis. At the Millennium, Asia accounted for over 20% of EU exports, making it our third-largest regional partner, ahead of the Mediterranean, Central and South America, the Gulf and ACP countries combined (around 17%). And the European market matters hugely to Asia. The region's trade surplus with Europe increased from $28.5bn in 1995 to $122bn five years later. Access to Europe's market has been a key contributing factor in Asia's post-crash recovery.

As two of the major international trading blocks, Europe and Asia must do everything in their power to maintain business confidence despite insecurity generated by the events of 11 September last year, and other factors depressing the global economy.

The business downturn has especially dire consequences for less developed countries in Asia, and this brings me to the fourth strand in our strategy:

to contribute to the international development in the region.
It is not just a moral duty to address the root causes of poverty in Asia, but a matter of enlightened self interest not least because the struggle against international terrorism must concern itself with causes of alienation as well as a simple determination to confront evil.

Enhancing market access for the poorest developing countries is a key part of our development strategy. Europe recently adopted a new GSP tariff preference mechanism for these countries, and our "Everything But Arms" initiative is also designed to enhance market opportunities for the poorest. It is also crucial that we should encourage middle-income countries on the Asian side to improve their own contribution to this vital work.

European co-operation programmes with the developing countries of Asia grew fast in the late 90s, averaging some €410m a year in the last years of the decade. Overall, the EU and its Member States account for around 30% of global overseas development aid going to Asia some way behind Japan (50%) but well ahead of the US (9%). The size of our programme increased substantially with the crisis in Afghanistan. Next year our Asia budget will total €546m.

The fifth objective of our strategy is to build global partnerships and alliances to help to address the challenges and the opportunities offered by globalisation.

I am tempted to develop this theme at some length as it is dear to my heart. I would happily do so in answer to questions later, if you would like. The effort to confront what is called the 'dark side of globalisation' is one of the great challenges facing the European Union and a field in which the Member States of the EU look to us for a lead because it is so clear that these problems from transnational crime and terrorism to climate change ; from HIV/AIDS to nuclear proliferation transcend national boundaries. The world is still taking its first tentative steps in addressing such issues, which demand strong international co-operation. Wherever we can develop common EU-Asian approaches and initiatives we can make a real contribution; and we can help to reduce temptations in the US towards exceptionalism.

The presence in Asia not of a superpower, but of two or three supercountries including not just China and India but Indonesia, the country with the biggest Muslim population in the world gives Asia a shared interest with Europe in ensuring a strong rule-based multilateral system.

The sixth and final objective of our new Asia strategy is to help to strengthen awareness of Europe in Asia, and of Asia in Europe.

This is not an optional extra; a convenient excuse for mayors to go on taxpayer-funded boondoggles to exotic places. It is about promoting educational, scientific, cultural and yes, political - exchanges at all levels. Of course, the EU cannot force Asia to promote itself here, but we have taken the lead by, for example, launching a scholarship scheme in China, funding cultural programmes across Asia, and extending the network of European Commission delegation offices in the region to Malaysia, Singapore, Cambodia, Laos and Nepal. It is my sincere hope that the nations of Asia will reciprocate in these efforts. They have much to share.

There are still many tensions, prejudices and misunderstandings deriving from Europe and Asia's often tangled and turbulent past. The events of 11 September a year ago have further complicated things because of the Islamic camouflage used by the terrorists. But we need to confront such issues, for all their sensitivity. We now have solid fora for mature political dialogue. We must use them.

So much for the general framework. Let me turn now to some more specific issues and relationships. Inevitably, in a speech of this kind, I must be selective.

Afghanistan

Afghanistan is clearly high on our Asian agenda at present. It is hardly surprising that since the events of 11 September this country and the entire subregion have been at the centre of the international stage. Even before these dramatic events the European Union was closely involved in trying to promote development there conscious, too, of the political dangers inherent in failed states, and the emergence of a phenomenon that might be called not State-sponsored terrorism, but terrorist-sponsored States. Through the 1990s the EU provided more than €450m in humanitarian assistance.

In the light of September 2001, the US military response, and invocation of Article 5 of the NATO Treaty we have of course massively increased our engagement. The rebuilding of Afghanistan is now one of the highest priorities of the whole international community, including the European Union.

I personally attended the Pledging Conference in January in Tokyo, where the EC promised a very substantial assistance package €1bn in reconstruction and humanitarian aid over the 2002-2006 period. The Community's contribution through the EC Budget represents only a part of what we are doing together as a Union. Taking the EU and its separate Member States, we have pledged €2.3bn for reconstruction over the five years under discussion. Within days of Kabul's liberation, the Commission had an Office up and running there. Already, we have committed well over €200m since that time, in addition to some €60m that we have spent in humanitarian aid.

But the raw numbers give little sense of our engagement. Last May, when I visited Afghanistan, I could witness at first hand how much our contribution is appreciated by local authorities and the Afghan people, not least by the British officers who were commanding the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) at that time.

The task of bringing political stability and security to Afghanistan is immense. Nation-building, especially in a country as traumatised and devastated as Afghanistan, is a tremendous challenge. The situation remains extremely fragile, complicated not just by the continued influence of warlords and drug-production, but by the flood of refugees returning, destitute, to that country. Above all, the European Commission is conscious of the necessity for long-term engagement. We are there for the long haul. I am confident that our Member States other international partners will stick with us on what is going to be a long and bumpy road. In the meantime we must ensure that we translate promises to help into rapid results on the ground. Our money is already funding 450 primary schools around the country, and 200 clinics. Our programmes have already provided some 3 million days of work for Afghans. We are the biggest single contributor to the operating costs of the government. And so on.

India/Pakistan

11 September cast its shadow much further across Asia than just Afghanistan. Within days of the attack I was on a Troika visit to the region where the EU agreed new assistance to Pakistan to help that country to cope with the predicted consequences, and increased textile quotas by 15%. President Musharraf's decision to back the allied effort in Afghanistan was of critical importance. But it came at a price. Islamic extremists frustrated by the Government's line (and later humiliated by the collapse of the Taliban) upped the ante in Kashmir, ratcheting up antagonism and tensions between India and Pakistan.

Those tensions reached such a pitch that it has been difficult even to develop a Regional Strategy between the EU and SAARC, the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation. Of course I would like to see the EU being pro-active in its relations with SAARC, but we should not hide our head in the sand. SAARC is still far from playing a serious role as a partner of the EU. At present, our greatest hope for stabilisation and for advancing the agenda of regionalisation lies with the civil society in the region.

When we offered to help in Pakistan last year, one of the other reasons for doing so was that we recognised the commitment made by President Musharraf to restore democracy in his country. For too long, and to its considerable cost, Pakistan has switch-backed between technocratic military governments and incompetent and highly corrupt democratic ones. What Pakistan needs is a democratic system that delivers results, not back-handers. So we do not underestimate President Musharraf's task. But, equally, it is important that the democracy he restores is real, and not a sham. We shall be watching closely as the coming election campaign unfolds. I hope that the elections will be free and fair, because if they are not it will be bound to affect our relationship.

India has intensely close cultural, economic and political links with Europe. Our imports from India have grown at an average rate of 2% a year over the past six years, to $11.5bn, and there is huge cross-investment. Europe has also invested heavily in its political relationship with the world's largest democracy, which is also an international actor of the first rank. Our leaders hold annual Summit meetings, and maintain excellent personal relations.

Yet I am conscious that Europe's links with India lack the breadth that we have seen with China, for example. India still ranks only 18th among the EU's trading partners. Perhaps Indians have some difficulty seeing us as a single Union rather than as 15 Member States. This should not be the case with a country that shares our values; our respect for ethnic, linguistic and religious diversity; our commitment to sustainable development; and our belief in a vibrant civil society. I want in coming months to explore with Indian leaders how we can give our relationship more weight.

China

No survey of EU-Asia relations can ignore China, where developments over the coming period will determine the future not just of the region, but of the world. Every day the headlines alert us to the awesome social, economic, and environmental problems confronting China. But however much I read the papers, I still find it difficult to change my view: I am bullish on China. To be a bear on China's prospects is, after all, to be gloomy about the outlook for mankind. China represents between a fifth and a quarter of humanity, with more than its share of creative and hard-working men and women. If they cannot overcome the challenges that face them the future for all of us will be bleak. So it is not China's success that should worry us, but rather what happens if China fails.

Any visitor to China is overwhelmed by the contradictions inherent in its helter-skelter progress. During a journey in any direction, but particularly from the rich coastal provinces into the hinterland, you cover in the space of a few hundred miles every stage of economic development from primitive, subsistence agriculture to high-tech industrialisation. Travelling from Shanghai through Jiangsu province last Easter, I was amazed by the pace of economic change. Yet even in China's richest provinces there were pockets of severe underdevelopment and backwaters of tradition reminders of how difficult it must be to govern a country so extreme in its diversity.

The transformation of Shanghai since my last visit 13 years ago was astonishing. But the changes that most excited me were more personal. There was, first, the candour with which people talked about their own experiences during China's darkest days of revolution and tumult. There was the sight of a packed cathedral, with over a thousand Shanghai Catholics gathered for Good Friday services. There were the 500 or so young students at Fudan University listening to and apparently understanding a no-holds-barred speech in English, and throwing questions at me about human rights, Tibet, Taiwan and other subjects that would previously have been taboo. There were the cadres at a meeting I addressed at the Central Party School who listened gravely to my speech about international politics in a post-ideological age, and whose first female questioner asked a probing question about banking secrecy and money laundering.

Do not misunderstand me. Is this now a country that takes its cue from Adam Smith and Alexis de Tocqueville? Hardly. There are still terrible human rights abuses. Capital punishment is meted out with mindless frequency. Too many of China's most thoughtful dissidents have been expelled from incarceration at home to exile abroad. The treatment of the Falun Gong betrays the nervousness of a regime that remembers too well the dramas of the last Chinese dynasty.

I will grant China's sceptics these points. But even when you have thrown into the balance the country's haemorrhaging banks, the sinking public finance system and creaking social services collapsing under the weight of the human casualties of rust belt industries, you still have not in my judgement won the argument for the pessimists. Why? Because China crackles with energy. The young people I met and spoke to can no longer be sequestered from the rest of the world. The implications of economic development and modern communications, including the internet, for the political system seem to me ineluctable and they will be beneficial.

Many historians and commentators doubt that China can manage a peaceful process of political change. They point to the bloody history of the last century as a harbinger of things to come. And their doubts are reinforced by the modern problems that crowd in on China's leaders. But we can do more than just to watch nervously as events unfold. We should, first, make clear that we regard China's success as good for all of us, and encourage China to take its full place in the institutions of global governance. Its entry into the WTO is an excellent development from this point of view. The EU has been engaged in consultations with China on illegal migration and trafficking in human beings. We must continue to engage China across the whole international multilateral agenda.

At the same time, we must continue to talk about human rights and the rule of law in China. These are not topics to be swept under the carpet. We do China no service when we blow hot and cold on these issues. Better for us to raise our human rights concerns consistently and openly controlling passing convulsions of commercial ambition.

I have long argued that it is impossible to open up any society even China in economic and social terms, while indefinitely keeping an iron grip on politics. Whatever the stated ambitions of today's Communist Party leaders, it is difficult to believe that many of the new generation who are climbing the ladder of power really believe that political progress can be stalled forever.

Challenged once for being an optimist, Winston Churchill replied that there didn't seem much to be said for spending one's life in the opposite camp. A pretty good way of approaching China too, it seems to me.

Significant personnel changes are expected in the Chinese leadership during the next months. We must all hope that the changeover is smooth. Whatever happens, I do not expect dramatic or immediate changes in policy. But the overall trend is, I believe, inexorable.

South East Asia

China has a very strong sense of itself; of its past glories; and of its destiny as a nation. It stands alone. But that is not a choice open to many other countries in the region. Like the European Union, they are looking for regional partnerships and unions to maximise their potential, and to assure their security.

The Association of South-East Asian Nations, ASEAN, was the first serious effort of this kind and the EU entered into a formal inter-institutional Agreement with it as long ago as 1980.

More recently, the Asia-Europe Meeting, ASEM, has come into being. This is an informal process of dialogue and co-operation, bringing together the EU and its Member States with Brunei, China, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. Since the first ASEM Summit in 1996 this grouping has proved an excellent forum for developing relations at the highest political level, and, through its many working groups, at the coal-face, too.

There should and cannot be a beauty contest between ASEM and ASEAN. They serve quite different and complementary purposes, and ASEM has a wider reach as it includes North East Asian countries. I will come to ASEM in a moment.

But let me first confess to a nagging unhappiness about the way in which ASEAN has developed as a vehicle for South East Asian political consciousness and economic development, and about the EU's relations with South East Asia. We need a more results-oriented approach. It is no secret that the Commission is currently re-evaluating the relationship and assessing how this should be carried forward.

When this point was picked up in the Daily Yomiuri in Tokyo earlier this year, it was given a negative spin. The paper noted that countries in the region had had difficulties wooing back European investors since the Asian crisis of 1997. It maintained that "some EU officials are now questioning the value of the partnership between the EU and ASEAN."

That is certainly not my view. I have no doubt of the potential of ASEAN, and of the EU's relationship with this grouping. But both sides should be getting more out of it.

An EU-ASEAN Ministerial is planned for next January, and I see this as a major opportunity;

We should try to modernise the contractual basis for our relations, which still rest on an agreement which is now more than 20 years old.

If that is not at once possible with ASEAN as a grouping, we should look at what might be done on a bilateral basis through new co-operation agreements with ASEAN's members;

We should raise the level and substance of our dialogue on everything from human rights to economic governance; from environmental issues to the fight against terror;

We should engage together on the Doha Development Agenda;

Above all, perhaps, we should enhance the EU's political visibility in the South East Asian region.

I am keen to avoid heavy new institutional obligations for either side. We all attend too many meeting, and need, if anything, to streamline what already exists. But there is a great deal of untapped potential in South East Asia as a region, and in the EU's relations with it. I have commissioned a Communication on this issue for next year and I hope we can launch a more active and productive phase in our relations.

ASEM

The Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM), meanwhile, goes from strength to strength. We are now only a few days away from the fourth ASEM Summit meeting in Copenhagen. It has a broad and ambitious agenda.

Let me briefly recall our ambitions for Copenhagen.

On the political side, we shall discuss new security issues including terrorism, and its root causes; and transnational crime. I am particularly keen to discuss the delicate issue of the balance that needs to be struck between security and civil liberties.

We also intend to increase co-operation, moving from words to deeds, on migration and other justice and home affairs issues. We must build on the Ministerial meeting earlier this year in Lanzarote, sharing strategic information on migratory flows; establishing contact points; and getting our respective experts together on matters of false documentation, for example.

In the economic field, we must send a strong political signal to try to restore confidence in the international economy. Both sides Europe as well as Asia must commit themselves to improve market access and investment conditions. We need to make more efficient use of existing instruments in defining key priorities and refocusing activities in Trade Facilitation and Investment Promotion. Likewise, we should invite economic operators to engage more actively in the ASEM economic dialogue to ensure that activities are business-driven and to obtain more focused and practical recommendations from industry.

Another ambition for the ASEM Summit is to encourage sound economic reform in the financial and corporate sector. Europe's own experience in regional co-operation on these fields may be of particular interest to Asia, and our Asian partners should take maximum advantage of the new possibilities offered by the Euro.

We will also be reviewing the results of the Johannesburg Sustainable Development Summit, making sure that the agreed decisions are carried through into action.

My hope is that one consequence of this ASEM Summit is that we shall institute structures that enable experts to consult in the EU-ASEM framework on an informal, ad hoc basis, as needs dictate. Until now, officials have tended to hold back, waiting for formal political cover for initiatives even of the most modest kind.

Copenhagen will offer a unique opportunity for European and Asian leaders to promote a better understanding between our cultures, civilisations and religions. For the first time, there will be an informal retreat to allow an open, confidential discussion. The anniversary of 11 September is an excellent moment to signal to the world that dialogue and co-operation will prevail over fear.

Conclusion

I had the great opportunity through a happy accident of democracy (though it did not seem so happy at the time) to spend 5 years of my political career in Asia.

This occurred at a time when Asia's vitality made some exaggerate what was being achieved there. After 1997, some were equally hasty in exaggerating Asia's problems. Predictions that the future belonged to Asia were followed by predictions of doom.

I never believed the gung-ho optimism, and I have no time for the excessive gloom either.

What is clear to me is that the future does not belong to this or that country even the world's only superpower or to this or that region. It belongs to ideas: to good governance; transparency; the rule of law; open markets; and international co-operation.

It belongs also to regional integration which can make an asset of diversity. That has been Europe's own experience. I am convinced that it can apply with equal force in Asia.

