In this speech delivered at the EU-China Business Summit in Beijing, EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson says that European and Chinese businesses should come together behind a shared agenda of fighting counterfeiting and openness and transparency in economic relations between Europe and China. Speaking the day before at the EU-China Summit, Mandelson said that when trade is damaged by counterfeiting or an unpredictable trade and investment environment, "far-sighted businesses on both sides are the losers". He calls for a "positive reciprocity" in the EU-China trade relationship.

Saying that EU-China trade will reach 300 billion euros in 2007, Mandelson calls EU-China trade ties "the defining trade relationship for both China and Europe". However, he says that there is a considerable frustration among EU businesses and governments at the continuing problems for EU businesses in accessing the Chinese market and protecting their products from counterfeiting.

Noting that rates of EU investment in China have fallen in both 2006 and 2007, he says: "The message I hear again and again is that companies are getting more cautious about bringing their money and business here because the regulatory environment lacks transparency. I don't believe that this is good for China. I think that if investment caps, unpredictable treatment and regulatory issues are driving away productive investment and the capital, valuable goods and experience and skills this brings into the Chinese economy then far-sighted businesses on both sides are the losers".

Mandelson says he sees the EU China trade deficit as "a measure of our untapped potential". He says that the EU seeks not to reduce Chinese exports to Europe but to improve the conditions for EU companies trading and exporting to China. He urges EU and Chinese businesses to support a shared agenda of tackling counterfeiting and improving accessibility and transparency for trade and investment. He says that even contentious issues like currency revaluation are rooted in a joint interest in strengthening Chinese domestic demand and reducing Chinese dependence on export led growth.

Mandelson concludes: "Europe is committed to China's success. That success depends in large measure on Europe's continued openness to China's goods and, in time, to China's reinvested surpluses. But China needs to do its bit to sustain that openness, by opening more to Europe's goods and services, and to our investment. A positive reciprocity".

For more on Commissioner Mandelson's visit to China visit: http://ec.europa.eu/trade/

Read Commissioner Mandelson's op-ed in China Daily: "China provides and opportunity"

Let me say without qualification, I love being in China. Shanghai and Beijing both feel a world of difference from the more stately dynamism of Europe. The sense of raw change here, of a hundred million lives dramatically changed in the space of two decades is very exciting - a powerful reminder of both the challenges and possibilities that China faces.

We're living in what will become one of the defining phases of modern economic history – the growth boom that is reshaping Asia and in doing so redefining the global economy. China, at some point in the last few years went from trade powerhouse to trade power. Not just the workshop of the world but a joint custodian of the open global trading system – and, without a doubt, its greatest beneficiary.

This growth has been good for China and good for Asia. It has been also, of course, good for Europe. It has created a huge potential market for our goods and investment. Twenty years ago there were not that many European businesses in China, let alone a Business Summit. Now we are doing business together on a grand scale, with huge possibilities for more if we get our relationship right.

Growing trade, growing frustration

This is the trick we need to pull off. It's customary to launch a summit like this with a declaration of the strength and the success of the trading relationship in question. Well, this year our trade will probably reach the 300 billion euro mark, which makes it one of the biggest trading relationships in the global economy. China is Europe's fastest growing export market, and as every one of us knows, China is now Europe's biggest source of imports. A full 7% of China's GDP is tied up in selling things in Europe, so size alone makes this the defining trade relationship for both China and Europe.

The European businesses I meet here are almost always bullish about the EU-China trade partnership. They are right to be. They do what good businesses always do. They see potential and reach out for it. They say that in some ways China is becoming an easier place to do business. They hear President Hu say, as he did at the National Party Congress this year, that “to stop or reverse reform and opening up would only lead down a blind alley.” They hear Premier Wen say, as he did in Singapore last week, that “China favours free trade and opposes protectionism.” And as much as a businessman ever believes anything a politician says, they believe it. They want to believe it, and invest in it. I back them in this desire.

But if I am honest I would have to say that there is a fair bit of frustration too. Both on the ground here and increasingly in European capitals. Frustration at the fact that European businesses lose an estimated 55 million euros a day in trade opportunities because of remaining barriers in the Chinese market. This is based on findings of an independent study commissioned by the European Union and published in February of this year. Frustration at Europe's exploding trade deficit with China. Frustration that Europe still sells more to the 7.5 million people who live in Switzerland than the 1.3 billion people who live in China. Frustration that in spite of the legislation put in place, and the efforts made by the State Council, European businesses operating in China still have serious problems with intellectual property theft.

I don't want to make another speech today about the trade deficit. We know it is growing hugely and is unsustainable. China's government sees that as much as we do. This deficit should be viewed as a measure of our untapped potential. Re-balancing the trade relationship is not a question of reducing Chinese exports to Europe. That's not our desire. It is a question of improving the terms on which European companies trade here, about levelling the playing field, and combating discrimination against foreign companies in the working of the economy. I hope this is an agenda that both European and Chinese businesses can support, and from which they both have a lot to gain.

The trade and investment environment

Many European companies in China are making profits, it's true. This is acknowledged by them, and by their representatives.

But it is fact – perhaps a surprising one - that last year rates of European investment in China fell, and that trend is continuing this year. This reminds us not to be complacent. The message I hear again and again is that companies are getting more cautious about bringing their money and business here because the regulatory environment lacks transparency. I don't believe that this is good for China. I think that if investment caps, unpredictable treatment and regulatory issues are driving away productive investment – and the capital, valuable goods and experience and skills this brings into the Chinese economy – then far-sighted businesses on both sides are the losers.

Intellectual property rights

I think businesses on both sides can and should also make common cause on better intellectual property protection. Europe has repeatedly said it needs to see much better protection of intellectual property rights in China. But so do thousands of Chinese businesses who want to have the confidence to invest in innovation and high quality production. This is a message I have increasingly heard from China's leaders.

I welcome the fact that European and Chinese textile companies are now cooperating more closely to protect intellectual property rights at trade fairs. The fact is that in a commercial culture that doesn't protect intellectual property, today's violator is tomorrow's victim.

There are no long-term winners from growing intellectual property theft. It is vital that the Chinese courts maintain a level playing field in which European businesses are confident their rights are going to be respected. China's push to become a high-tech producer will only succeed if the fight against IP theft and counterfeiting can be won.

Even on a highly sensitive issue like exchange rates, we should be focusing on our joint interests. A stronger yuan would stabilise the Chinese economy by boosting domestic demand and reducing dependence on export-led growth.

By increasing domestic demand and creating a better social safety net in China you can reduce the huge levels of precautionary saving that are padding the Chinese banking and discouraging the system's reform.

Conclusion

There is a little expression in English that Bo Xilai and I used to describe our 2005 textiles agreement. It is “win-win”. Our whole trade relationship should be a win-win. I think that a balanced and open economic relationship is a win-win, and that smart businesses on both sides will agree with that.

Sometimes people in Europe say to me: “If China grows any more and fills our markets, our jobs are going to be finished.” I understand the concern and we need reciprocal openness to meet that concern. But the truth is, China is now such an important part of the global economy, that many more jobs will be lost if China's growth stalls. That's why Europe is committed to China's success. That success depends in large measure on Europe's continued openness to China's goods and, in time, to China's reinvested surpluses.

But China needs to do its bit to sustain that openness, by opening more to Europe's goods and services, and to our investment.

So I would like to express a hope here. A hope that this Business Summit and the political Summit which will follow confirms the foundation of our Strategic Partnership – our mutual trust – and gives a new impulse to a relationship which has been good for China, for Europe and for the world.

That's the win-win I am seeking. A positive reciprocity, and one that I hope will unite us all in this Summit.