Today we are honoured and pleased to receive a large Chinese delegation at the highest level. I would like to extend my thanks to the Europe-China Business Association which has organized this important meeting. It is indeed a historic meeting, because it is the first top level trade delegation to come to Brussels since China's accession to the WTO. It is an honour to receive in Brussels Prime Minister Wen, and I am of course also pleased to see my colleague, the new Chinese Minister of Commerce, Mr Bo Xilai, here in Europe so soon after taking up his post. I am also happy to see large presence from the European business community. You have seized the opportunities offered by the giant transformation underway in the Chinese economy. Contracted investments by EU companies in China increased by 30% last year which testifies to the attention you pay to this market, to the point that China is now already the EU's second largest trade partner.

China and the EU are both changing, and this should be mirrored in our trade and economic relationship. China has developed and continues to grow at breakneck speed. The EU has just finalised a truly historic enlargement. During my recent visit to China in mid-March, in a speech at the EU Chamber of Commerce in Shangai, I highlighted a concept which is central to the EU integration, namely the concept of "quality", expressing the hope that EU and China would be able to build a "quality relationship". What do I mean by that?

This means that, beyond the figures of the growth of our bilateral trade, it is indeed the quality and the content of our bilateral trade and economic relationship that in the future need to attract most of our attention and of our efforts. I think this mirrors well the concerns expressed by the Chinese leadership that what is essential for a sustainable economic development is more the content of the growth than the absolute figures as such. And the question of quality in EU-China relations is of course equally relevant on questions of politics, science or culture. But I shall leave that to others.

As far as trade is concerned, cooperating more closely in the current WTO round of trade negotiations, the Doha Development Agenda is the key element towards building this quality relationship. Closely behind comes China's progress with regards to WTO compliance, which I have of course both discussed in detail with Minister Bo.

But why do I insist on the DDA? The answer is two-fold. First, because it is a multilateral negotiation, a format which the EU is inherently comfortable with, and I hope China is becoming more comfortable with. Second, because it covers more than just market access. Trade will only remain a key driver of world prosperity if the rules are able to keep up with economic reality. Although we know that our Chinese friends have had to work hard to implement the WTO accession agreement, we hope China will, together with the EU, take a constructive role commensurate with its trade and economic potential.

Indeed we are now intensifying our bilateral contacts on this issue, and today we will sign an agreement setting up a Trade Policy Dialogue between us. This Dialogue will be a useful instrument to develop our cooperation on WTO matters and also to address major bilateral issues, as well as trade in textiles.

Not only China is undergoing tremendous changes in these days, so is Europe. We have just completed EU enlargement. It is hard to overestimate the importance of the final end to the division of Europe, in political and economic terms. What counts for you is that the European Union has been enriched with 10 new members, who have traditional and solid trade relations with China.

This 'friendly merger' will create the biggest single market in the world with over 450 million consumers, bigger than the US, Mexico and Canada combined, accounting for roughly 20% of world trade and contributing to more than a quarter of the world's GDP. The accession of the ten new Member States will provide simpler access to the whole region. For example, a Chinese investor established in Slovenia will now have the freedom to distribute goods or provide services throughout the EU and of course under the same conditions as investors from the existing EU countries.

An important detail: The new Member States are already part of the landmark EU-China tourism agreement which entered into force on 1 May 2004. Thanks to this agreement more Chinese tourists will be able to choose among the best of EU tourist destinations, such as Brussels! Indeed, Minister Bo, you are perhaps a forerunner of the Chinese tourism explosion, which we very much welcome.

Not least because, the next step in strengthening our relationship will be not only the exchange of goods and services, but more and more direct contact between our peoples. Your presence here is part of this development, which is vital for a true European-Chinese partnership. And of course, I wish this conference the best possible success.

Thank you for your attention

