It is my pleasure to join you for this event. Let me start by thanking you for the work you do to promote positive and well-functioning business relations between the EU and China.

The end of the year is always a good moment to pause and take stock.

So today, I propose to provide an overview of EU-China relations, and how they have been affected by wider geopolitical trends in 2022.

First of all, I am not breaking any news when I tell you that this has been a very challenging year for the European Union.

We entered January with green shoots of optimism that we were turning the corner after Covid-19. Our recovery plans were firmly in place, and the economic forecast was encouraging.

Then, everything changed. Russia's brutal aggression against Ukraine threw our continent into crisis, but also galvanised us into action.

It really cannot be emphasised enough how profoundly Putin's war has shifted reality in the European Union.

This war has shaken Europe to its core.

Things that were previously thought impossible became possible.

Countries that were neutral for generations applied to join NATO. Europeans unquestioningly opened their borders and their homes to millions of war refugees. And the Member States of the European Union showed a strength and unity that surprised many – including Russia.

Every policy choice we make, every action we take, is driven by our commitment to support Ukraine and isolate Russia. Because we see this war as an existential threat, not just against Ukraine, but also against our democracies – the system we believe in.

I cannot tell you precisely how the EU will emerge from this phase. But things will be different.

This also applies to our relations with China.

China's ambiguity concerning Russia's aggression was noticed in Brussels, and in all EU capitals.

This continues to influence the debates about how our relations should evolve, both at EU and Member State level.

There is talk about diversification of supply chains, about the need to address concentrated risks and strategic dependencies as well as to avoid building up new ones.

So, what direction is this debate taking?

First of all, I want to reassure you that there remains a healthy level of political and economic realism.

The EU-China relationship is very much alive. We are key trading partners.

Trade flows remain robust: daily goods trade amounted to €1.9 billion in 2021.

China is also the largest supplier of goods to the EU, and the third export market for EU goods.

On the investment side, annual flows in both directions have remained strong in recent years, around €10 billion per year.

Trade volumes into the EU from China are solid, and growing. 

The statistics paint a clear picture: EU goods imports from China grew from €375 billion in the January to October period in 2021, to €526 billion in the same period in 2022.

This makes China our number one source of goods imports, with a total of 22% of all EU imports.

We can therefore say that the EU is now a very important export market for China, and an increasingly important partner.

This matters, because China's openness to trade has made a decisive contribution to the country's continuing growth, lifting hundreds of millions of Chinese people out of poverty. This is a remarkable achievement that should not be forgotten.

And, for many European companies, China continues to be a major growth market, with potential to strengthen competitiveness and innovation.

Beyond bilateral interests, there remains an overriding common interest to work together on global economic and trade challenges.

Let's put it simply – as two major global economies, we share responsibility for the well-being of the global community.

Our duties in this respect range from addressing supply chain disruptions, to food insecurity, debt relief, WTO reform and climate change – to name just a few.

There are still avenues open to allow us to work on mutually beneficial outcomes in these and other areas.

So clearly, this is an indispensable relationship.

But it is crucially important to understand that from our point of view, this relationship remains critically unbalanced.

Look at the trade relationship, for example. The EU's trade deficit vis-à-vis China stood at €336 billion for the January to October period in 2022.

This is a very stark reminder of how unbalanced we are, when it comes to trade and investment openness.

As a result, this is the second aspect of the EU's considerations regarding future relationships with China: there is a strong desire to see China deliver improved fairness and reciprocity in our relationship.

This is why there are increasing calls for more pragmatism, less naivety, in our engagement with China.

Let me illustrate this point by describing the situation faced by EU investors. The September report from the EU Chamber of Commerce in China is very illuminating in this respect.

The first thing to note is that EU investment in China remains strong.

But at the same time, investor sentiment is growing more uncertain, in direct response to the deterioration of the business environment and the geopolitical situation.

EU companies in China feel that internal and external challenges are eroding China's attractiveness as a destination for foreign investment in favour of emerging markets.

The view is that China's leadership is becoming less pragmatic, and more inward-looking, moving away from the rest of the world. This makes China's business and political environment less predictable, less reliable and less efficient.

As things stand, EU companies are not looking into any decoupling, but some are opting for localising further activities within China to enable easier compliance with the regulatory environment.

Other companies are putting further investments on hold, and looking into options for diversifying and securing alternative supply chains outside of China.

As a general conclusion, the report urges China to make pragmatic efforts to rebuild investor confidence.

Of course, the decline in business and investor sentiment was also linked to China's Zero Covid policy. It remains to be seen how China's radical move away from this strategy will affect the business climate.

Let me give another example of the need for more balance and reciprocity in our trade and investment relations.

The EU market is open for Chinese operators to participate in procurement.

This is not the case for EU operators in China.

This imbalance in trade and economic relations leads to increased belief that we need to protect ourselves. It leads to the demand for more assertive EU policies.

This is why we have been building up our toolbox of autonomous measures, to help protect ourselves against the risk of unfair economic actions by global partners, including China.

The Foreign Direct Investment screening, the Foreign subsidies regulation, International Procurement Instrument, Anti-coercion Instrument: these are all amongst the latest examples of EU autonomous tools.

Having said that, the willingness on our side to work with China in a constructive and fair manner remains strong.

The last EU-China High-Level Economic and Trade Dialogue was a useful staging post in this regard.

We discussed a broad range of topics including macroeconomic issues, supply chains, trade and investment concerns, and financial services.

The EU was forthright in raising concrete concerns about harmful Chinese policies, including specific trade barriers.

From the EU side, while engagement in this type of forum is important, we expect to see the commitments being implemented.

My sense is that implementation of these High-Level Dialogue commitments is very much needed in order to preserve and enlarge the space for engagement. Otherwise, there is a risk it will narrow.

Progress, not process, is what counts in these turbulent times.

I trust that in the face of this global storm, EU and China can make small but significant steps forward in order to cement our trade and economic cooperation, and deepen our understanding of each other's positions.

Let me pause my reflections here, ladies and gentlemen.

Now I would like to hear more from you.

EU trade and investment policy relies on input from business to help us adjust to the evolving geopolitical context, including political and regulatory developments impacting on China's domestic environment.

In this respect, it is very valuable for me to hear your concerns and feedback.

Indeed, it is even more important in a time where supply chains are being disrupted, and business operations have to adjust rapidly to complex developments.

So I look forward to our exchange today, and I am eager to maintain regular contact with you, to hear how you are managing risks, and how European institutions can support your trade and investment choices on the ground.

Thank you, and let me take this opportunity to wish you and your families a peaceful holiday season.

 