Introduction

Mr Behrens, many thanks, and let me say what a great pleasure it is to be back at the EU Chamber for what is now my fifth visit to China as EU Trade Commissioner, and I suspect you will be seeing me several more times before the end of this Commission.

In recent months, I have also had the chance for frequent contacts with my main counterpart, Minister Shi Guangsheng, over the course of this autumn. I had the opportunity for a lengthy bilateral meeting with him in Copenhagen in the margins of the ASEM meetings, where China is playing an increasingly leading role, and also saw him at the EU-China summit the following week, as well as frequent telephone contact.

The simple fact this reflects is the growing and growing importance of EU-China relations, including and perhaps most obviously in trade. The Chinese trade numbers of course are startling: both imports and exports have more than doubled in just the last five years. And of course, while unlike some we never complain about bilateral trade deficits, it hasn't escaped our notice that our trade deficit with China has more than doubled in the same period, and now stands at a rather substantial 45 billion euros on Eurostat figures in 2001, our largest single bilateral trade deficit.

I have no great earthshaking announcements to deliver on this visit. That is not how you develop a close working relationship. My intentions are, quite simply, more of the same. As China prepares for a major shake-up in its political leadership in the next few months, I am picking up the strong signal that China promises continuity rather than change. For our part, we are also signalling that we want to maintain with the new leadership the same multi-layered, multi-faceted relationship that we have been able to develop with the current generation of leaders in China. I have enormously valued - and indeed enjoyed - my contacts with the current Chinese leadership, and indeed I hope many of them will stay on in the new government. But in any event, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and Minister Shi will be remembered - and for many other things, of course - as the statesmen who really made Chinese WTO membership happen, who had the vision to see how it would fit with domestic economic reform, and followed up on the detail to make it happen.

So during my visit here, I have had lengthy meetings both with Mr. Shi and with Madame Wu Yi, as well as a good meeting with Minister Li from the AQSIQ, the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine to discuss the difficulties we are having on trade in foodstuffs.

Last year, my visit came hard on the heels of the very successful Doha Ministerial meeting, which saw not only Chinese accession to the WTO finally confirmed, but also the launch of the Doha Development Agenda, the new round of WTO negotiations. So one year on, I am of course very keen to see and learn how WTO implementation is happening in practice, so I want to hear your views on that, and following my visit to Shanghai last December, I will also be going to Guangzhou tomorrow for an unfortunately brief look at how implementation is proceeding down there. But in my meeting with Minister Shi, we focused on both implementation of the WTO agreements and our current and future co-operation in the DDA, so there is plenty of hard evidence there that the EU's trade relationship with China is becoming ever more vibrant.

Indeed, I also got the chance to point out how open the EU economy is to Chinese products. For example, even in relatively difficult economic times, such as in 2001, when total imports into the EU declined by 1%, Chinese imports rose by 8%.

And even in textiles, and Minister Shi, of course is a fully trained textiles negotiator, and constantly tells me that the EU has a restrictive policy, Chinese imports rose in 2001 by one and a half times the global figure [6% vs 4%]. And, as I said to Zhu Rongji in Copenhagen last month, despite Chinese concerns about EU anti-dumping policy, only 0.5% of total EU imports are subject to trade defence measures.

But given that I have here the chance to deliver a message to the European business side, I want to also leave you with a warning. China's economy is growing so fast, changing in so many ways, that Europe has to step up its efforts if we are remain influential. Just over two years ago, the EU was the number one investor (in terms of new FDI) in China. We are now behind both the US and Japan, and our share of new FDI has fallen to 9%, even if - and many companies are good examples of this - our investment is often at the cutting edge of new technology (consider, for example, satellites, high speed trains, and aircraft). But although our export growth to China is still strong, rising by 11% year-on-year during the first 7 months of 2002, the rate of our overall trade growth is slower than the US and Japanese growth rate.

And just to take one key sector, that of cars, a major EU car-maker has managed to increase its annual sales by almost 20% but at the same time, lost 10% of its market share. Our relationship, your relationship, with the Chinese economy is living proof of the need to run faster and faster just to stand still, and we all, both business and government, need to play our part in that.

WTO accession: implementation

So let me start with a pivotal, perhaps the pivotal question from the perspective of the EU Chamber, and that is an assessment of how China is managing thus far in the WTO.

Seen from Brussels, the overall assessment is a positive one. We are following with great interest the enormous efforts China is making to put in place a stronger legislative framework, whether this is in relation to intellectual property, or services, or at the technical level, the structure for quota and tariff-rate quota management, etc. There is no doubt in my mind that China and her leadership is extremely eager to demonstrate that China will respect her WTO obligations in full.

Of course, from your own perspective, the key is how these commitments are being translated into action on the ground in terms of your ability to carry out your day to day business. I fully recognise that even implementing the letter of WTO commitments is not easy to do, particularly in a vast and diverse country like China. But abiding by the spirit of WTO rules will be even more of a challenge. By this, I mean that it is relatively straightforward - from an administrative viewpoint - to deliver lower tariffs, for example. Much harder to set in place the necessary mechanisms and structure to ensure full transparency and predictability. This means for China and others a step change in day to day business practice.

To return to the question of investment, my feeling is that this will a crucial element over the next five years as companies decide whether or not to increase their investments in China. Clearly, companies will only open new branches, for example, if they feel they are going to be profitable. But these decisions are further coloured by Chinese conditions. For example, in the banking sector, there is a new capital requirement for licences of RMB 100 million per licence (€ 12 million), and 6 licenses are needed to cover the full scope of banking activities. Of course as a former banker, I never question legitimate prudential concerns.

But I have to wonder if this is not disproportionate, when you consider that only € 5 million is required to establish in the EU a subsidiary benefiting from the single banking passport. Another example: the new procedure imposed on express delivery services from 4 November. We are looking at this hard to be sure it is neither discriminatory nor burdensome, and gives EU operators the same rights they had upon Chinese accession to the WTO.

Allied to these teething problems is the transitional nature of a lot of the Chinese commitments in the WTO. So although companies need to take the plunge now to safeguard their position in the Chinese market-place, a lot of the benefits only come on stream over a period of several years, in the services sector (banking, insurance) as well as for goods (with trading rights being granted only 3 years after accession). Of course, I know this well, having negotiated this - in close partnership with European businesses - two years ago. But I am fully aware of the difficulties posed by such situations as the car industry, where although the tariff rate quota has been increased in line with Chinese commitments, EU companies are not yet in a position to directly request a quota allocation. So the true position will not be clear - in some sectors - for the next three to five years. And as Zhu Rongji said to me himself, China still has to take a decision - herself - on the next stage of liberalisation in sectors such as telecoms and insurance.

So what can we - in the European Union - do to reduce uncertainty, in partnership with you, the European business side, operating here on the front line ? Obviously, we will continue to tackle the really hard problems with the Chinese government direct, and you probably won't believe how many hours Minister Shi and I have spent this year discussing the problem of chloramphenicol in certain food products, and the highly charged political aftermath.

As to other approaches, I want to hear your views. But let me give one example of where we can work closely together. We are especially vigilant over the establishment of new non-trade barriers, and I am aware that a number of European companies have expressed concerns to us about this. These problems related to a lack of transparency (e.g., on quota allocations), to the introduction of standards out of line with international standards (e.g., with regard to cosmetics, or radiation emissions from mobile phones). So the immediate solution: please stay in touch with us, notably with Klaus Ebermann, Franz Jessen and their excellent team at the Delegation here in Beijing. You know how good they are, how keen they are to help, and you'd better believe that they are quick to let us know of problems back in Brussels that we need to take up with the Chinese government at the political level.

Medium term solutions: to be addressed in Geneva. Here, the EU is playing a full part in the framework of the so-called Transitional Review Mechanism which has been set up to review Chinese accession on an annual basis. We have singled out the main areas where we see problems: the general issue of transparency, problems of transposition of WTO commitments into Chinese legislation, and in one or two cases, the establishment of new non-trade barriers. And we have been very active in pushing for action on these problems. The overall assessment will go to the WTO's General Council in December, so I know that the Chinese will be very keen to make a strong impression before then.

But I also want to stress that we are taking a distinctively European approach to problems of WTO accession. Our approach is not to swing the club straightaway, but to address the questions rapidly in a rather positive way with the Chinese. We are also avoiding the rather excessively legalistic approach used by some other major trading partners of China in the Transitional Review Mechanism. We are focused on results, and concrete actions by the Chinese side, such as on protection of intellectual property rights, for example.

It is one thing to ensure that the framework of legislation is in line with international standards, and quite another to ensure that enforcement, particularly against piracy and counterfeiting, is rigorously pursued.

Finally, in terms of the longer term, we must absolutely not forget the importance of technical assistance. I have argued in the past that the date of Chinese accession was not so much the finishing line as the starting line in terms of meeting WTO standards. The EU is absolutely committed to helping China in this difficult transitional period, and by extension, committed to helping European business become ever more engaged in the Chinese market. We are currently finalising the design of a major new programme, worth 15 million euro. With a 15 million euro EU grant and a Chinese contribution of 5.6 million euro, this is so far the largest technical assistance programme supporting China's integration into the international trading system. In terms of current or recent co-operation projects, this adds up to EU support of around around € 22M.

Combining financial assistance with firmness where necessary is very much the European approach. Carrot and stick are both needed: the use of stick alone just causes political tension.

And - final word on this - what does this mean in terms of the final stage, of going to WTO dispute settlement proceedings if we do not manage to solve a particular dispute ? Some have speculated that we will not want to "upset" China by going to dispute settlement resolution. Well this is untrue. I am absolutely ready to go to the WTO where other courses of action have produced no effective results. But we don't, I think, help matters by dragging China into the WTO at the first sign of a problem. Our preferred approach is to recognise the size of the challenge, and to try to build confidence in the systems, both in the EU and China, to facilitate trade. Of course I am ready to go to the WTO if necessary, but only if other methods fail.

The Doha Development Agenda

Before I give you the floor to hear your views on current problems, I would like to say a word about the importance of the growing collaboration on the DDA between the EU and China. Sometimes it may seem odd to you, as businessmen, that the EU and China, after 15 years' long march into the WTO, are plunging again into fresh negotiations to further liberalise market access on an MFN basis, and to again improve the rules which govern world trade.

But this project is of critical global importance if we are to keep the WTO relevant, and I have found the Chinese remarkably open to European ideas in the DDA, and I hope vice versa. We have, in Geneva, and between capitals, started to develop a very close working relationship on all the key issues, and I think we have found many common interests. We are impressed by the quality of Chinese contributions to the debates in Geneva, by the level of commitment to the DDA not just in the WTO but also in regional forums such as the ASEM and APEC, and by the practical and businesslike solutions which China is putting forward, for the most part.

Of course, there are one or two exceptions. Perhaps understandably, China does not have major plans to open its own market further in terms of classical market access, and will inevitably mount the argument that she should not have to pay twice. That may be fair, but the fact is that in trade rounds, you have to be ready to pay to play, and I think China recognises this for example in the area of services where she has come forward with a surprisingly ambitious and comprehensive request list.

Either way, my message to you, the European business community, is that we are intensifying our work with the Chinese government, and so we are very keen to hear your priorities so we can put together an ambitious result in the Round. Clearly, we face some very difficult times ahead in the world economy, which will be sharply felt in both Europe and China. Difficult times which will, moreover, be made worse if war erupts in the Middle East. So it is in both China's and the EU's interest to have an ambitious outcome in the Doha Development Agenda, and so I am doubly pleased at the strong commitment made by the Chinese leadership to this effect, both in the EU-China summit statement, and in the words of Minister Shi himself.

As to the detail, we are now assembling a major bilateral dialogue with China on the new Round, and a team of WTO experts will be flying out to Beijing next month to launch that process. We are particularly keen to work on a number of areas of interest, such as trade defence instruments and safeguards (where I think we can both agree that the rules need updating), technical barriers to trade, and agriculture. We also see good prospects for working together on the so-called new issues such as investment, public procurement, trade facilitation, and competition. These are of course vital issues for the EU and EU business, but they are also development issues: rule-making issues are a key to continuing to attract good quality investment, and improving the quality of public administration. Progress in these areas means more stability and predictability for companies, lower costs of trade transactions, and better export performance. In terms of the current needs of the ailing world economy, it is not surprising that we are seeing the importance of the Doha Development Round rising up the political agenda.

Conclusion

Last year saw the launch of a new era for China and the WTO, a new era which sees China emerging rapidly as one of the key poles of the world economy. This year, we got down to business. The message I take from this year is that China is absolutely committed to delivering on the terms of her WTO accession package, and that the reward / effort ratio in Beijing remains very high. But in addition, close, close cooperation and collaboration: between the EU and the Chinese authorities, and between ourselves, is going to be increasingly vital in terms of addressing the specific trade irritants we face, in terms of moving our trade relationship forward.

The fact is that - together - the EU and China can make an enormous contribution to keeping markets open, to keeping the WTO steaming ahead, and to strengthening global economic governance.

I am very pleased, therefore, that all the signs are that China remains very much on track both economically and politically to claiming her rightful place at the global economic top table.

Thank you very much: hope we still have time for your questions and comments.

