
Thank you very much, Emma. Ladies and gentlemen, it's a pleasure to be here again.

Thank you for inviting me. As you said in your introductory remark, last time we met in this forum was in Beijing in July last year, and the world has certainly changed since then. Yet the central message, the value of trade, the importance of open markets is still the same.

There were many who were impressed by President Xi's strong message to the World Economic Forum in Davos.

And we should not surrender to protectionism. It's a risk to Europe, it's a risk to the rest of the world. So we are all waiting now for the remarks by the President to translate into action and make trade and investment more open, more free, more fair. And I would like to briefly set up a number of ways how that could be achieved.

The rule-based multilateral system with the World Trade Organization at its center is very often questioned. Yet it is the only system that ensures that trade is fair and open, and we should maintain and strengthen our shared commitment to it. It is in our common interest. This year, later in December, there will be a ministerial meeting in Buenos Aires.

And I hope it will be a success with ambitious negotiated outcomes showing that WTO is still there, still counts, and still is the place where we set the rules. And I hope that China will step up its leadership roles and join us and work with us to achieve a successful result.

Second, a robust environmental goods trade agreement would also show how trade, competitiveness and the environment can all work together. And I hope that China shares our commitment to an ambitious agreement and that we can soon resume the talks that were suspended last December.

Thirdly, open procurement markets means governments can offer better services for less money. So I hope that China will be able to accede to the WTO government procurement agreement as per the commitment in China's accession protocol to the WTO.

And fourth, we would like China to continue to be more open to European investment, just as Europe is now open to Chinese investors.

EU companies do continue to face barriers. According to this study that has been mentioned several times from this podium, nearly half of the EU firms say that it has gotten harder to conduct business in China last year. And as a consequence, EU investment in China is at its lowest level. in years, while Chinese investment in the EU reaches record levels.

02:49 SPEAKER_00
And this imbalance may be due to the lack of the playing field.
EU businesses want rules applied equally. Reciprocity should be the guiding principle of our relationship.

Our ongoing negotiations on an investment agreement are a constructive means to rebalance the situation and expand trade and investment. We are committed to a modern investment agreement at the level of two large economies. An investment agreement between the EU and China would send a powerful signal to the world, to our people, but also to the rest of the world, at a time when other voices are calling for more protectionism, more barriers.

And an agreement on an investment would also help delivering on the promise made at the third plenum in 2013 to give the market a more decisive role in the economy and reduce state intervention. The investment agreement would send a positive signal to the world on path of future economic reforms.

Reforms and a bigger role of market in the economy would help reduce overcapacity and trade imbalances in sectors like steel, aluminium, solar panels.

Overcapacity is not just an issue for China's relation with its partner. It means that resources are devoted towards unproductive investment with unnecessary energy consumption and emissions of carbon.

Sound economic development, trade, investment also require respect for the rule of law with independent lawyers and judges who can operate freely and independently.

To conduct business and for the daily lives, people need to be able to access free and independent information, communication, and discuss. This is a fundamental human right which also applies, or particularly applies, in the age of internet. And limits to online freedom affects ordinary people's lives, but it also affects negatively the business climate.

The European Union is China's largest trading partner and main investor. China's success is in Europe's interest. And we have made progress in our work together, as we see in joint documents that we will sign later today on geographical indications, intellectual property. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,

The European Union is a close partner to China. We cooperate through dialogue. We address challenges. We speak openly about our different disagreements or problems. We do that bilaterally. We do it in multilateral fora. And I hope this may long continue, and I sincerely hope that the summit that we will soon start here will be a success. Thank you very much for inviting me, and I really hope that your day today also will be a success.

