Ladies and gentlemen,

It is a real honour and pleasure to be here in Beijing for an intense agenda of ministerial meetings, and for the opportunity to have this exchange with the European business and diplomatic community in China.

The sense of my visit to Beijing is to deepen the dialogue – or, as I like to put it, build a bridge – between the EU and China.

EU and China are major trading, economic and now increasingly geopolitical blocs.

It is vital that we continue to engage, seek a better understanding of our individual approaches, explore possible areas of cooperation, but also discuss frankly our divergences.

Because our relationship cannot be reduced to a binary choice of “friend or foe”. Team up or decouple.

In fact, no relationship between two major powers can be as simple. And to build a bridge you need to have at least two pillars.

Both of them need to be solid. Because in life, in politics, and in business, everything is based on a true balance of power.

And Europe has realised that it needs to rebalance its relationship with China, as with others. 

With the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia's war of aggression in Ukraine, the conflict in the Middle East, the energy crisis, supply crunches and attempts to destabilise our democracies, we have seen the emergence of a more assertive Europe that looks after its own interests.

The emergence of Europe as a power and a credible partner that builds bridges with other powers of the world – as equals, where each part brings something to the table.

Now, let's focus on EU-China relations, which are complex and multifaceted, as reflected in our description of China as “a partner, a competitor and a systemic rival”.

Just a few weeks ago, here in Beijing, my colleague and friend Josep Borrell, Europe's “foreign minister”, described the relationship as “conflictual interdependence”, explaining that rivalry does not equal hostility.

Looking at EU-China relations from my portfolio as European Commissioner for internal market, industry, digital, cybersecurity, tourism, space and the defence sector, I see three priorities:

Rebalance our relationship
De-risk our economies and societies
Address global challenges together
 

It is time to rebalance our relationship.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Europe is a major export market and investment destination for China. We welcome this and want it to remain thus. But we need this relationship to be balanced, reciprocal and mutually beneficial. Today, that level playing field is missing.

If we take only one figure: between 2002 and 2022, the trade deficit of the EU towards China in goods has increased from €41bn to €396 bn.

This is mainly due to an increase of imports from China forchemical products, raw materials, machines and cars.

The clean technology sector is particularly telling. Efforts to combat climate change and access secure and affordable energy is creating new markets, and everyone wants a piece of the cake.

And global competition is a good thing, because it will foster technological innovation and bring down prices.

But competition needs to take place on fair and reciprocal terms, not by dumping products on markets, keeping prices artificially low with state subsidies, or favouring domestic manufacturers over European operators.

In Europe, we have equipped ourselves with new tools to monitor trade and investment flows and public support policies from other countries, and to take action when warranted to safeguard our interests.

We recently launched an anti-subsidies investigation into electric vehicles coming from China to establish whether anticompetitive behaviour is taking place, and if so, to act upon it.  

This should not be seen as an aggressive move. This is simply checking whether the trade rules to which we are said we would abide are respected.  

And we will remain vigilant in other clean tech sectors and carefully assess allegations of unfair practices.

I am of course thinking of the solar industry, where China's massive economies of scale, access to raw materials and cheap – but not always clean – energy, has led to extreme overcapacity of solar photovoltaic modules in Europe.

Not to mention increasing concerns about the possible presence of forced labour in supply chains.

I am also concerned about the wind industry, with reports of Chinese equipment manufacturers offering European project developers 15-55% lower prices than European wind turbines, with deferred payments of up to 3 years and allegedly refusing to sell components to EU competitors.

In addition to preserving the level playing field in Europe, we also need to address the fact that European companies are not enjoying a fair and level playing field in Chinese markets.

In this context, I am aware of your concerns about transferring data abroad. Because data is the fuel of today's economy. Europe has been putting forward clear rules to promote an industrial data single market with the EU Data Act and the EU Data Governance Act.

In the EU laws, we managed to strike a good balance between trust and free data flow. We cannot therefore accept that other blocs put disproportionate and unjustified obstacles.    

I was pleased to see some potential progress recently on the side of the Chinese authorities, and the willingness to establish a mechanism of clarification for cross-border industrial data which is a great concern for EU businesses. I hope now is the time to take the next step forward and operationalise it.

Finally, we cannot ignore issues with public tenders, including those related to 5G. European companies have great technological strength and competitive bids.

Yet, this is not reflected in their procurement results. When Huawei is enjoying a solid 30% of market share in the EU, it is not acceptable that Ericsson and Nokia would be excluded on unclear criteria from bidding in 5G pushing down their market share at a single digit level.

We will continue to work for reciprocity in public procurement, so that European companies benefit from the same opportunities in China as Chinese companies do in the EU, addressing restrictive practices in clean tech but also beyond, in areas like construction, public transport, medical devices, power generation and pharmaceuticals.

Because we want to ensure reciprocity across the field, rebalancing it so that all teams have a fair chance at success.

But words need to be followed by actions.

A few weeks ahead of the next EU-China summit, we need to see concrete outcomes on what we have discussed.

So, this is the sense of my visit today. And I am passing on this message to Ministers I meet with.

Europe remains an open continent and the most attractive destination of foreign investment. But it is only fair that we want to preserve a level playing field, our intellectual property, the effective control of our companies, and of course our security of supply. In other words, to be open, at our conditions.

 

We need to de-risk our economies and societies
Ladies and gentlemen,

The second priority I would like to focus on is de-risking. De-risking our economies is not about self-reliance: it's about resilience.

It is about drawing the lessons from excessive dependence on one market. Like depending on imports of Russian gas. Or importing a majority of raw materials from China and being exposed to export restrictions on gallium and germanium – essential elements for semiconductors and more – and now on graphite.

That is why the EU has put forward the Critical Raw Materials Act, to ensure a secured and sustainable access to the raw materials needed to fuel our green and digital transition but also our space and defence industry.

The de-risking approach is not politically motivated or protectionist. It follows the same rationale that China or the US have been pursuing for years: increase the resilience of the economy and boost industrial and technological competitiveness.

And it is grounded in facts, based on in-depth analysis of our strategic dependencies.

It is also rooted into our experience of the Covid crisis during which Europe was left on its own by its main trading partners, whether it was the “People's Republic of China first” approach for the masks, or the “America first” approach for the vaccines and its components.

Of course, China is not the US. Europe discovered at that moment the true meaning of the new geopolitics of supply chain at play.

I believe this helps to understand our new strategic approach of de-risking. It is not against anybody or any country. It is country neutral. It is for Europe, for its resilience, for its security of supply.

 

This is the sense of our recent Economic Security Strategy which defined Europe's approach to de-risking in four key areas: supply chains, critical infrastructure, technological security and trade actions.

As a first step, we are concentrating on technology risk and technology leakage based on the enabling and transformative nature of the technology, risk of civil and military fusion and possible misuse in violation of human rights.

We have identified 10 strategic technologies which deserve specific attention. Starting with four most sensitive areas: Advanced Semiconductors technologies, Artificial Intelligence technologies, Quantum technologies, and Biotechnologies.

Based on these analyses, we will take the appropriate measures, whether it is diversification of supply, increased partnerships, strengthened investment or more protective measures, such as export controls or reciprocity measures.

Let me be straightforward: Whenever the security interests of Europe will be at stake, Europe will not hesitate to act on its own. Europe will be an actor of its own security, and not a mere follower of the decision of others.

Because we are clear: De-risking does not mean decoupling. Decoupling our economic ties is neither a viable nor a desirable option.

Our aim is not to cut Europe off from our trading partners, especially a crucial one such as China. Not only is this not what we want, but it simply wouldn't be feasible.

Rather, the aim of our strategy is that, by defining very concretely which risks we are facing, we can mitigate them.

Risk management: this is the basis of Resilience. This is what the US are doing, this is what China is doing, this is what we ought to do.

Security is also our driver when we are looking at ensuring the resilience of our critical infrastructure, whether digital such as undersea cables or energy and transport infrastructures like pipes or harbours.

This is why we have also bolster our cybersecurity regulations and operational cooperation at EU level. We put forward minimum requirement first for essential economic operators, and for any goods or software entering the EU Single Market – implementing a de facto cyber security by design approach.

And we need to de-risk our societies.

Online platforms and social media have become central in our lives. While this has brought vast opportunities, it also comes with risks, such cyberbullying, amplification of terrorist content, disinformation or even online sale of life-threatening fake medicines.

 

With the Digital Services Act, Europe has decided to organise its digital space, with clear rules of the game, rights and obligations. Any online platform is welcome in Europe, but on our terms.

 

You know that we are currently investigating the compliance with the DSA of AliExpress and TikTok, among a number of firms. I was pleased that [at least] Alibaba opened its doors to me this morning. Transparency is a welcome first step.

 

 

We will only be able to address global challenges together
 

Ladies and gentlemen,

Despite our different political and economic systems, China and the EU have a lot to gain in deepening our partnership.

We are facing challenges that are global in nature and which no single country will be able to address on its own. Think of pandemics. Food security. Climate change….

A couple of weeks before COP28 in Dubai, I must mention our common existential fight against climate change.

In a world where average temperatures are ever increasing  the EU and China must continue to join forces, tackling the triple crises of climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss.

The areas of cooperation are numerous, be it on circular economy technologies, or on emissions trading markets.

I note that China is now a world leader in clean technologies deployment, including for nuclear energy.

 

These efforts can and should accelerate, for China's benefits and for the rest of the world. It is indispensable to put the world on a trajectory compatible with our Paris agreement objectives. Which is also good for business: otherwise, we wouldn't have the race to clean technologies I just talked about. 

Tackling this challenge together also means a new approach in third countries. Development efforts in Africa, in particular, must be achieved with the interest of our African countries' counterparts in mind. They must benefit from the added value that their raw materials resources, for instance, can generate for the world.

Finally, I would like to address artificial intelligence as a further area of cooperation, although this may come as a surprise. Let's not fool anyone: there are some fundamental differences between China and Europe in the way that we envision and regulate AI.

In Europe, we are finalising the world's first AI Act, which reconciles safety with innovation. We will prohibit uses of AI that carry an unacceptable risk to fundamental rights and EU values.

I am talking -for instance- about social scoring or broad, large-scale real-time facial recognition.

Chinese AI developers will have to respect these rules if they want to enter the EU market. At global level, I see potential for collaboration with China on AI.

First, there are certain safety risks that can affect us all.

While we may not agree on all risks related to AI, I believe we are equally exposed to the misuse of powerful AI models for nefarious purposes.

Some of these risks may still be unknown, some may seem improbable, but we should be ready to work together on identifying and mitigating them.

Second, AI can be a force for public good. It can help us respond to major natural disasters, adapt to climate change or improve healthcare. Both the EU and China are investing heavily in such applications. We can do more to collaborate on such applications with a positive global impact.

These are also concrete elements I came to discuss with China.

 

Conclusion

Ladies and gentlemen,

I remember my first visit to Beijing. I came to a dusty city. A busy city. The city of nine million bicycles.  

Now, walking around, I see how it has changed.

I still see many bicycles, but now they are geo-localised, linked to QR codes and mobile payments.

I see e-commerce everywhere.

I see a city that has continued to grow, that has kept up with the fast pace of digital developments.

This shows the real power of the digital transformation.

And seeing this makes me understand how, despite growing difficulties, you as entrepreneurs and business representatives are willing to continue to play a role in China's economy and benefit from this large market and its opportunities.

Let me take this moment to praise the work that the EU Chamber of Commerce in China does. Your President, members, and staff.

You have been champions of European businesses, making sure their voice is heard despite difficult and deteriorating conditions. You stood up from them throughout the pandemic – while also facing difficulties at a personal level and with your families.

Our partnership with you is crucial for making sure we receive the right information at the right time and are kept up to date with the situation.

And as you know, on our side, we worked towards a re-launch of dialogues both on the industrial and on the digital front, with the idea of substantiating our exchanges and feed the political dialogues at all level, including  ahead of next month Summit.

In the new geopolitics of supply chains, in the current state of the world, and given our mutual trade interdependence, it is imperative we establish the ground for dialogue, despite our differences.

It is not abnormal for the EU and China to act differently upon each other respective security interests. This does not mean we need to be conflictual. 

If we want to create reciprocal opportunities, legal certainty and open markets for companies, trade and investment we must find a framework in which we can address the difficult questions with China.

Because otherwise, if we don't talk, if we don't engage, if we don't establish – at the right political level – the right dialogue,  it will be more obstacles less opportunities, less legal certainty and at the end less growth and jobs for both China and EU.

This is the sense of my presence here, as bridge builder. Ready to engage with one compass: the preservation of the European interests. 