My theme today is that progressive market opening and trade liberalisation are not hostile to the social and labour standards we seek internationally and in Europe. On the contrary, rising economic growth and wealth generation are the conditions we need for these standards to be achieved and sustained.

It is right for us to focus on this because in my judgement, the ‘social dimension' is back.

The question of a ‘Social Europe' will be at the heart of the debate about Europe's future. ‘Oui' or ‘non', this conclusion will be widely drawn from Sunday's referendum in France. And I have no doubt at all that social discontents and reform fatigue played a central part in last Sunday's political earthquake in Germany.

In my remarks today, I want to reflect on what this renewed focus on the social dimension will mean - both for Europe in general, and my own responsibilities for trade globally.

Many of you attending this Forum may jump to the conclusion that as a Brit, I will find this renewed focus on the social dimension unwelcome. After all, aren't the Brits, even pro-European Brits, only interested in Europe in order to drive forward enlargement and economic reform, strengthen the Single Market and promote free trade?

There may of course be the odd honourable exception like my good friend John Monks – but so truly exceptional is John, that it appears to underline the validity of the general rule!

Actually, I have always believed in the social dimension.

My preoccupation has not been to question its importance, but that the Social Europe we build should be modern and forward looking, rather than stuck in the past, defensive and protectionist. Its driving purpose should be to provide security by advancing opportunity rather than fruitlessly attempting to block change.

The need to accept the inevitability of change and reform is fundamental – and it has been brought home to me with exceptional force in my six months as Trade Commissioner.

Europe cannot stop the world and get off. We cannot pull the blankets over our heads and hide from the shifts taking place in the global economy.

Take China's emergence as a world economic power. I pick on China not because I want to stoke fears. Rather the reverse. I want Europe to rise to the challenge of accommodating a new China as a constructive partner not a deadly rival.

China will continue to send its tremors but it is an emblem for what is happening on a wider scale in Asia and South America – and some day hopefully in Africa and the Middle East, as these markets and growing productive capacity start to emerge and participate in the benefits of globalisation.

Ten years ago, Chinese exports to Europe amounted to roughly a fifth of those of the United States. Today they amount to about three quarters. Over the last five years they have expanded at 23% a year – an estimated 38% in 2004.

For the past two months, most days of my life have been touched in one way or another by the problem of Chinese textiles. I have faced insistent demands for the imposition of safeguard measures against surges of imports on a scale that our domestic producers complain they cannot withstand or adjust to.

My point today is not whether you think I have done too little or too much. I have tried to strike a careful balance - acting objectively on the basis of the evidence put to me - yet robustly to demonstrate to the Chinese the seriousness of the problem of short term disruption on which I am urging them to act with us.

My point is a much more profound one – about the economic challenges ahead. Within our WTO obligations, safeguard measures are only available to deal with short term disruption. Permanent quotas cannot be re-imposed. The issues we face in textiles today will affect other sectors tomorrow. Intensifying competition exists in all the traditional industrial sectors: footwear, machine tools, consumer electronics, and cars. You name it: we're going to experience it and the impact will be severe, not just in France and southern Europe where the volume of demands for action in textiles has been heard loudest, but across the EU as a whole.

Of course the temptation is to cry foul. To denounce competition as unfair; to complain of artificial exchange rates; to protest that goods are being sold below long run sustainable costs; and to argue that wage levels reflect forced labour and the absence of trade union rights.

As the responsible political authorities in Europe, the Commission and the Member States have a duty to listen to these arguments, not dismiss them as a fantasy. We must, and will, be prepared to act where a well founded case can be made about unfair trading and we will pick up the appropriate instruments of defence.

But let us not deceive ourselves and not face realities. Europe is faced with a fundamental choice of directions.

One way is to take the line of least resistance and to bow to the populism either of the Left that rejects globalisation or the populism of the Right that blames foreigners for everything. But this is a cul-de-sac, because by putting up barriers between ourselves and world markets, we may save jobs in the short term but at the cost of our industries becoming globally uncompetitive in the longer term.

The only alternative is the difficult and painful tasks of reform and modernisation. It's the policy that the Barroso Commission set out in February for Europe and its Member States, explaining our revised Lisbon strategy.

To prioritise Growth and Jobs is not a neo-liberal obsession. Yes, it's about wide-ranging economic reform. Yes, it demands of us to press ahead with opening markets in Europe, in order to provide European business with a vibrant economic base on which it can compete in the rest of the world.

But it's not a strategy to Americanise Europe. There are political choices open to us. Reform is for a purpose: to make our European model of society sustainable for generations to come. To allow us to protect the environment and to achieve the goal of sustainable development.” Political choices can be made. Another world is possible”.

I realise that for many trade unionists, the use of phrases like ‘reform and modernisation' is seen as code for more labour market flexibility, less job security, a weakening of employment rights, and welfare reforms that reduce social benefits and/or make entitlement to them ‘conditional'. And reform may indeed involve tough and unpalatable choices.

But the larger failure of economic reformers – and I accept the collective self-criticism - has been in not offering a strong enough vision of a new and appealing Social Model for Europe within which the short term pain can at least be understandable and justified, even when it still hurts.

My speech today is not the place to set out this concept in full because I want to broaden my remarks to you.. Let me just give you a brief insight into my current thinking.

The Single Market was never conceived an end in itself. I still remember my feeling of excitement and pride when Jacques Delors re- launched the idea of Social Europe. His concept - that market liberalisation and the drive for competitiveness had to be matched by flanking measures to promote social cohesion and environmental sustainability is – still valid. The right social and environmental policies strengthen competitiveness and at the same time make reform more acceptable. But the achievements of Social Europe have in truth been too limited. True we have put in place a set of minimum social standards, which for all the furore they have aroused and still arouse, have improved millions of people's lives, from the right to paid holidays to a comprehensive outlawing of all forms of discrimination at work. But beyond a minimum floor, Social Europe can make more progress.

In my view, the reason why Social Europe has been constrained is because it was seen as a bid for competence over social policy by the European institutions, rather than a shared endeavour with the Member States in a spirit of “unterritorial” partnership. Creating a modern Social Model for Europe is not a question of harmonising diverse social systems; it is instead a question of building on common values to face up to and tackle the consequences of economic change.

The challenge of today is to equip every citizen of Europe, from whatever social background, nationality, colour or religion, to fulfil their own individual potential in a rapidly changing world. The essence of our European cultural and religious tradition is this recognition of the uniqueness and equal worth of the individual. We then combine this essential insight of the Enlightenment with recognition of the need for a strong society, particularly in both the social catholic and social democratic traditions, to enable the individual to achieve fulfilment within a stable social framework.

The situation today is that these essential insights of our Europeanness remain valid. But the collective institutions and systems we built in the last century to underpin them have outlived their time – in particular, the social consensus corporatism, the social insurance welfare state and centralised universal public services that played such a crucial role in the era of mass industrial society.

The ends remain – but the means require modernisation and reform. What we need today are new approaches and new institutions to tackle the new social challenges of extending opportunity throughout the lifecycle– tackling inherited disadvantage by investing in the social support and education of young children and their mothers; providing high standards of schooling in ethnically diverse and socially fractured communities; promoting skills and lifelong learning for those who missed out at school; reaching for world class standards of excellence in higher education and research; opening access to retraining and help with adjustment for the victims of economic change; helping older workers reintegrate to the labour market and abolishing the traditional concept of retirement.

These are examples of the common challenges a modern Social Model should be addressing. And only when we have better defined them should we then address the second order question of the role of the European Union and its member States in tackling them successfully. I want the European Union collectively to find a way of addressing these issues in the months ahead.

Meanwhile if Europe must have a stronger social dimension, so should its trade policy.

From my perspective, trade has the potential to contribute to the overall objective of sustainable development in all its dimensions - economic, social, and environmental. Multilateral trade liberalisation can be a sound social policy. It can foster long-term economic growth, stimulate trade and investment and assist developing countries' integration into the world trade system. And it can do this in a way that will help combat poverty and raise living and working standards for all members of society.

Notice, however, my emphasis on the word can. There is no magic wand of free markets that guarantees it will. But I defy anyone in this room to set out an alternative strategy to a managed progressive market opening that will produce better results for developing countries.

The Social Dimension is not, of course, officially part of the WTO's work. If we are honest, this is not surprising. Globalisation has integrated and dynamised market economies across the world. Its triumph has been breathtaking since the collapse of Communism. But globalisation has not created a world of shared values. I cannot tell whether the opposition of the developing world to inclusion of a meaningful Social Dimension will change. I hope in time it will. I suspect that the competitive issues arising from the rise of China will turn what was a North- South divide over trade-and-labour issues into a South- South debate.

I have never believed that a genuine concern for decent labour standards is covert protectionism. But when some people talk of the dangers of developing country imports as an “invasion”, I have to say that it is not surprising that developing countries draw the opposite conclusion.

Globally, the European Union will continue to fly the flag for a meaningful social dimension. We had no hesitation in using our Trade Policy Review last autumn – an exercise in multilateral surveillance and benchmarking that every WTO Member undergoes - to demonstrate to others that trade and social policy should and can go hand in hand.

Our own trade policy instruments leave us more room to offer positive incentives. Our Generalised System of Preferences has for a number of years offered the possibility of additional concessions for countries that respect Core Labour Standards. We have just revised our GSP to put much more emphasis on sustainable development. Under the new GSP Plus, additional tariff preferences will be available to vulnerable countries which have both ratified and implemented the main international UN and ILO conventions on labour and human rights, environmental protection and good governance, including the fight against drugs.

And where countries systematically flout core labour standards, we will not hesitate to take away the positive trade incentives that we have put in place. Both international trade unions and the ILO have evidenced the systematic violations of freedom of association in Belarus.

As a result, I now intend to recommend to the Commission and our Member States that we proceed with the temporary withdrawal of GSP benefits for this country. If we are serious about labour standards, our incentives must be able to work both ways.

We also include a social dimension in our bilateral agreements. The Cotonou Agreement includes specific provisions on trade and labour standards, as will the Economic Partnership Agreements that replace it. Our agreements for example with South Africa and Chile cover social issues in a comprehensive way. For any future agreements, we will develop the mutual supportiveness between trade, environmental and social policies.

In addition we are committed to promote Corporate Social Responsibility, both on a European scale and globally with OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.

To better understand the impact of our multilateral negotiations on social development (as well as economic and environmental aspects); we have undertaken ‘sustainability impact assessments'. The SIA results are published, discussed openly and integrated in policy making. The dialogue is real.

But the assessments are not perfect: we lack expertise on how to measure the wider impact of trade policy, particularly on social policies. It is much easier to establish what trade policy should not do to labour standards and social issues, rather than what it can and should do.

These issues will come more to the fore as awareness of the condition of Asia's rise, including China's growth, spreads amongst the public. Separately, I have been challenged in the European Parliament on what I am doing as Trade Commissioner to protect the rain forest and come to the aid of other environmental victims. These social and environmental concerns need a considered response from us. They will not go away.

I intend therefore to build up our capacity both internally within the Commission, as well as our ability to support best practice overseas in policy making and institution building. We need more knowledge and skills in understanding the impact of trade policies on employment and working conditions – for example how to increase the employment intensity of growth, and how to assist adjustment to change through active labour market policies. Without better policies, the weakest and the poorest risk being left at the margins of globalization.

As a result, the Commission has launched a joint project with the ILO on devising methodology to measure the impact of trade liberalisation on domestic employment and social indicators. My aim is for this to become a general tool that our developing country trading partners can use in future to refine their trade policy. We ourselves stand to learn a good deal from this exercise.

I will also need to reflect on how to take forward our GSP+ and what new initiatives to develop. Our ongoing negotiations with our ACP partners on Economic Partnership Agreements will be a good opportunity to explore new ways of fostering sustainable development in regional trade agreements. In this, trade unions in the ACP countries have an important role to play and we should try our best to support their capacity to do so.

We should look for examples of best practice that others can emulate- for example, Cambodia. Despite being a Least Developed Country and all the problems that come with that, Cambodia has not only chosen a path of liberalisation and WTO membership but also made it clear that this should not come at the expense of social conditions.

Trade liberalisation and poverty eradication are going hand in hand offering a good model for others and contesting the view of some that these two things are incompatible. I believe that we have much to learn from this example, where a combination of local partnerships between unions, employers and the government and the support of the international community has lead to very positive results. The ILO of course plays a crucial facilitating role in this.

Also, the scope of our trade-related assistance should be widened beyond hard-core “trade” subjects like customs or sanitary control systems. Our joint project with the ILO should be seen as a first example of addressing the link between trade and adjustment in our assistance programmes.

There is a need for better co-ordination between the main international institutions – WTO, ILO, and Bretton Woods. We need more policy coherence and Europe will play its full part in promoting this.

In conclusion, let me repeat: I am as committed to advancing a modern social dimension in trade policy as I am to reframing a modern Social Model for Europe that will enable us to withstand today's competitive challenge. I welcome debate and new ideas – which is why I am here today. It isn't easy. But nothing worthwhile is – and that's why I will keep at this throughout my mandate as Trade Commissioner, and I look forward to working closely with the ILO in doing so.

