Ladies and gentlemen,

It is a real pleasure to be with you today. This is my fourth visit to China but my first official visit as President of the European Commission. I have come here - on this special occasion of the 30th anniversary of our diplomatic relations - with one central message: the EU is deeply committed to developing its strategic partnership with China further.

World peace, prosperity, progress, harmony, friendship, protection of the environment – these were key themes for hundreds of Chinese children when they took part in a painting contest held by the European Commission Delegation in Beijing to mark the thirtieth anniversary. The bright and colourful pictures clearly demonstrated the very high expectations our children have for our relationship and its benefits.

Have we come a long way together in these last thirty years? Yes we have. When Sir Christopher Soames, then European Commissioner for External Relations, arrived in China in 1975 to establish diplomatic relations, who could have imagined that, thirty years later, the EU and China would be global players enjoying such a rich partnership? With total annual trade between us at €175 billion, the EU is now China's largest trading partner. And China is our second largest. But the relationship has now gone well beyond the commercial.

Our manifold achievements range from trade and tourism, to environment and energy. We now engage in twenty different dialogues in as many sectors. We have signed several major new agreements, including our milestone Approved Destination Status tourism and Galileo satellite navigation agreements, which have opened up Europe to thousands of Chinese tour groups and taken our scientific cooperation to a new level.

And the EU remains a key contributor to China's development and reforms: by providing access to our huge market; through inward investment of €10 billion per year; by fostering exchanges of expertise and technology through involvement in programmes such as the international thermonuclear fusion project; and last but by no means least through EU financial cooperation, which is used to support China's reform process.

Do we have difficulties? Of course we do, - as in any relationship we do not always see eye to eye on all issues. For example, only when there is a strong trade relationship are there trade problems. Nonetheless, we should be confident that our relations have matured sufficiently to deal with any disagreement in a responsible manner and in full confidence of the willingness of both sides to overcome these challenges. We must always keep the big picture in mind and should not let one or two issues overshadow our overall relationship.

Should we take this relationship even further? No doubt about it, this is in the clear interest of both sides. Looking ahead, China will certainly remain at the top of our external relations priorities, and we are interested in extending our partnership to cover even more areas.

Undoubtedly, one of the most ambitious projects lying ahead of us is an ambitious new EU-China Framework Agreement, which will give full expression to our strategic partnership. Our current bilateral agreement dates back more than 20 years and has long been overtaken by events. A new framework agreement would upgrade our political relations and provide a much stronger basis for our increasingly multi-layered relationship. It would also allow us to anchor our ties in shared values as well as shared interests in vital areas such as human rights, non-proliferation, anti-terrorism and migration.

The EU is also interested in negotiating bilateral agreements on civil aviation and on readmission and visa facilitation. Only a few days ago we held a very successful EU-China Aviation Summit here in Beijing, which marks the beginning of a new era in our relations in this field.

Combating illegal migration and trafficking of people has been a priority for our cooperation. Just last week, we held our 6th High Level Consultations on the subject here. We are looking forward to starting negotiations on agreements for both readmission and visa facilitation before the end of 2005. Once concluded, these will be major cornerstones in the common home that we are building.

Many of these issues will be in play at the 8th EU-China Summit, on 5 September in Beijing. I will be back then for my second visit this year to China.

As you can see, key players in Europe and China meet each other frequently at all levels. But is that sufficient to ensure true long-term sustainability in EU-China relations? I don't think so. We need to get our people more directly involved.

I therefore propose to make people-to-people contacts one of our priorities. Exchanges at all levels of civil society would underpin our political relations and strengthen mutual understanding and trust. To that end I propose to establish an ambitious exchange programme of students and scholars.

Among other things, we must speak each other's languages in order to understand each other better. Now, I know it is a tall order to learn the many European languages, and Mandarin seems to be somewhat of a challenge as well, but we have millions of smart young people on both sides who can rise to the challenge. This would also pay dividends for our economic and trade relations.

Now, let me talk for a moment about the EU. I have been told that China is concerned about recent developments in the EU and their possible effects on our relationship with China. I would like to reassure you that the EU is not about to turn its back on the world.

On the contrary, we have had to deal with setbacks in the past and the EU emerged from them stronger than before. The recent rejection of the European Constitution in two Member States is certainly a setback for us, but it is also a great opportunity to reflect on the future direction of Europe.

Take a historic perspective. Think of Europe 60 years ago – WWII, Europe divided by a terrible war. This was one of the worst events in European history. Then think of Europe 30 years ago – some European states, e.g. Portugal were not democracies. And only 15 years ago, an iron curtain divided Europe. Today, most of the countries that used to be separated by the iron curtain are in the Union.

Think historically and you will see there are only reasons for optimism. Twenty-five Member States with 500 million people share the same values. Never in history, had twenty-five independent states shared a common future. Europe is not built around an empire imposing its will, but consists of independent countries. Of course running this system is complex. Sometimes we have problems, but there is no reason to think that Europe is not on the move. Some crises can also present opportunities.

All over the continent vigorous debates are now taking place about the future of the EU. This is a sign of a healthy democracy, which is one of the core values of the European Union. We now have to identify a way forward that is more acceptable to our citizens, as well as beneficial to the EU as a whole and the world at large. I am confident that we will use this debate in a positive way, leading towards a more solid European Union.

This is important, as the CASS President said in his intervention, because the world community expects the EU to become a more coherent and effective foreign policy actor. We must rise to that challenge. You have witnessed for yourselves that the EU is playing an increasingly important role in international issues such as Iraq, on which we hosted a major international conference in Brussels last month, and an important role in other issues. Indeed, we have committed to doubling our development aid in 2004-2010, giving special priority to Africa. At the G8, the Commission made a major contribution to moving forward on climate change and development. The EU is as active as ever and playing its full part.

We in Europe are full of admiration for China's spectacular economic growth. China's economic development is truly impressive by any measure. If current annual growth rates persist, China will soon be one of the world's largest economies. Barely three years after China joined the World Trade Organisation, the country has risen to be the third largest global trader. This is really impressive.

The EU has been supportive of China's transition and opening up and we stand ready to assist in China's political and economic reform process further, drawing from our own experience. We have also welcomed China's increasing international and multilateral engagement, both in the political and economic field.

Of course, we are aware of the huge challenges China is facing: while development has lifted millions out of poverty, it has also created huge income disparities between both urban and rural areas and between regions. We know that addressing these disparities is an urgent priority of your government, not only in the interest of equity, but also in the interest of maintaining political stability.

We understand the magnitude of the tasks facing the Chinese Government. In Europe, we have learnt from our experience that without a sufficient level of political reform, growth may eventually be slowed or disrupted by instability. China's internal long-term sustainability also depends on its ability to introduce political reform, allowing for more democracy and civil liberties. We are of the opinion that the further improvement of human rights, good governance and the rule of law and the development of a strong civil society are key elements for the sustained success of China's reform process.

Economic growth may also be slowed by environmental problems such as the depletion of natural resources and the impact of high pollution levels on human health. The environment is just one area where the EU is keen to collaborate more closely with China, looking at the post-Kyoto framework, and better ways of using existing or alternative forms of energy, for example. Further risks are increasing unemployment related to the restructuring of state enterprises and instability of the financial and fiscal system.

The EU, as the largest trader in the world, greatly values its important trade relations with China. Nonetheless, I will not hide from you that in the EU there is also some concern about China. As you know, unemployment in parts of the EU is quite high and our citizens are increasingly worried about job losses that are perceived to be caused by outsourcing. The rapidly growing bilateral trade surplus in China's favour (€78 billion, or some $100 billion, in 2004) makes these perceptions more difficult to manage.

The EU is facing structural and global issues here and we will address them by striving for economic and social reform, innovation and investment in a knowledge-based economy. In this way we will increase our competitiveness and remain an attractive economic partner.

In doing so, it is nonetheless important to convince public opinion and our citizens that our partnership with China is a great opportunity. China's new prosperity will also create additional chances for us by providing us with new markets. Our recent agreement over textiles has shown us how dialogue can help to overcome trade conflicts. And I certainly hope that the new EU-China framework agreement will include an ambitious trade and investment agenda that will take our relationship to the next level.

China's growing economic role has also generated political responsibilities in the region and China's regional diplomacy has been positive. China has engaged with virtually all its neighbours, signing Free Trade Agreements with ASEAN, taking a moderate stance on the South China Sea territorial disputes, driving the new Shanghai Cooperation Organisation in Central Asia and above all, hosting the six party talks with North Korea. I congratulated PM Wen yesterday for the positive role of China in this regard.

The degree of economic integration in East Asia is already impressive, but to make East Asia a more peaceful place in the long-run, political cooperation should also be intensified. Growing nationalism in East Asia needs to be overcome and regional integration should not be undertaken to the exclusion of others. Reconciliation and renewed cooperation between India and China, as two emerging powers in Asia, are encouraging, for their neighbours as well. Chinese–Japanese reconciliation is equally important for a stable Asia and for further integration in this area.

We also encourage China to persuade the regime in Burma to pursue national reconciliation and progress towards democracy. The EU shares China's desire for peace and stability in Asia and will continue to actively support Asian integration and dialogue through the ASEM process and the EU-ASEAN dialogue.

In the run-up to the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008 and the 2010 World Expo in Shanghai, the international community would welcome China starting a direct dialogue with Taiwan as a sign of great maturity. This would also greatly advance China's international standing and reputation as a global player, with a particular responsibility for peace and security in East Asia. Both the region and the world as a whole cannot afford conflict in East Asia.

The EU wholeheartedly welcomes China's growing international role and its increased international and multilateral engagement in tackling global challenges. There are many recent examples where China has made a difference, for example through its growing participation in UN peacekeeping missions, through its appointment of a Middle East envoy and its hosting of a UN conference on Peace in the Middle East. China has also become an important partner in the global fight against nuclear proliferation.

The EU and China have many common multilateral priorities, such as non-proliferation and the reform of the UN system, and international cooperation is already a basic part of our relationship. But we must go further and strengthen our global partnership to promote international cooperation, global security and governance and forge new alliances to counter the darker side of globalisation, which includes international crime, terrorism, illegal immigration and epidemics.

Reform of the United Nations is essential for successfully tackling the challenges of the 21st century. The EU and China should cooperate in the preparation of the Millennium Review Summit in September and in the achievement of the Millennium Development goals.

Together we can encourage effective multilateralism, whether within the UN, specialised international agencies or the WTO. We applaud China's increasing acceptance of globally-accepted rules and standards, in particular its ratification of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We look forward to its ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

The EU expects a China that is open, democratic, committed to the rule of law at home and abroad, acting responsibly as a global player in helping to maintain regional and global security.

As I said earlier, the development of a strategic, mutually beneficial and enduring relationship with China is one of the EU's top foreign policy priorities for this century.

In achieving this goal we must convince the international community that the EU-China partnership is not a threat, but an opportunity to create a more stable and balanced international order. It is not our intention to just steam ahead with our bilateral agenda. We must be inclusive and also strive to collaborate with and benefit third countries in advancing global peace and development.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Let me conclude by stating that on this special occasion of the 30th anniversary of our diplomatic ties, we should be proud of our accomplishments so far and look to the future with confidence.

Both the EU and China face many internal challenges, but we have the will and courage to tackle them. In doing so, we will earn our place as key players in the 21st century.

History will judge us by the contribution we make towards world peace, prosperity, progress and the respect and protection of the environment. Those young artists who took part in the painting competition expect it from us, and we owe it to them and to all our children. As the great Chinese Confucian philosopher Mencius said nearly two and a half millennia ago: “The great man is he who does not lose his child's heart.”

Thank you.

