I am very happy that my first summit with China was indeed a very fruitful summit. Considerable progress was made in many areas since the last summit : agreement on tourism, satellite navigation for example.

Today, we were able to sign several important agreements which will increase our cooperation in the field of science and technology (including nuclear research), will strengthen the links between our customs administration and facilitate exchanges of students.

China is emerging as a global player across the board and developing this relationship will be one of our external policy objectives during my mandate. I believe it is in the interest of both the EU and China to embark on this long-term strategic relationship.

The EU has become China's most important trade partner and our 2nd trade partner. This more than anything gives you an idea of the strength of our relationship.

I believe that this should lead us to a new EU-China framework agreement very soon which will include a strong trade and investment component but also all the elements of our cooperation which is now very broad. This includes human rights and human and cultural exchanges.

I welcome the important measures and initiatives announced by Prime Minister Wen, which materialise this upgrading of the quality and intensity of our relations. On the Commission side, we are ready and eager to correspond accordingly setting up similar mechanisms of cooperation at high level.

A reinforced relationship also implies mutual responsibilities : there are important issues where we could and should jointly exercise leadership : the Doha development round is a point in case where China should play a role commensurate to its importance in world trade;

I also believe that China as a global player has a responsibility in making sure that the end of the textile quotas will not lead to an uncontrolled surge of Chinese exports, damaging for less developing countries. China has a role to play in avoiding this by applying a policy of moderation;

I accept the kind invitation of Prime Minister Wen to visit officially China.

I am personally committed to EU-China relations and so is the European Commission. I am sure that during the next five years there will be great progress in the strategic partnership between the EU and China.