Many thanks Peter / Serge for your kind words, and it is a pleasure to be back in Shanghai, and particularly on my first visit to the chamber in Shanghai, China's industry, finance and banking capital, and by the same token, China's first cosmopolitan city. The EU Chamber in China has come on in tremendous strides in the last five years, and I have no doubt that it will continue to grow in importance in the coming years: delighted that the Shanghai chapter has already established nearly 200 members in two years.

The fact is that Shanghai continues to be almost an emblem of China's economic success story, setting an incredible pace in China's race for growth. At the current rate, Eastern China (of which Shanghai is of course a key part) will have a larger economy than either Poland or Indonesia. At even more remarkably, in less than four years, at current rates of growth, Eastern China could surpass Brazil. And the positive trend between EU and China as a whole, has of course continued in the same vein. China officially became the EU's second largest trading partner in 2003, behind only the US, and we are second only to Japan in your own list. Our total trade has now reached 135 bn €, scarcely imaginable even a few years ago, and is advancing at around 17% a year.

But at the same time our deficit has widened to 55 bn €, and is also growing rather too healthily. I must stress to you, as I have to the Chinese authorities, that this is not yet a political problem, at least in comparison with the high level of concern in the US over what is admittedly an even larger deficit. The reasons for our relative calm are worth considering, briefly. First, our deficit is smaller. Imports are 50% lower than US imports, and our exports 50% higher than US exports, despite the high euro, and at least in part because of the diversified and rather specialized range of goods offered by Europe. Second, we have less of a trade problem with the rest of the world the euro zone is running a 6 billion euro surplus at present. Third, and as I said last year in Beijing, there is a fair degree of understanding in Europe for the unique competitive position that China has assembled a combination of high levels of FDI, skilled and relatively low cost labour, and a rapidly growing middle class. And finally, of course, there is in Europe less of a sense than in the US of China mounting a geopolitical challenge. For all these reasons, we are relatively immune at this stage to the kind of difficult trade politics with China that continue to preoccupy the US. But let's not be too relaxed about this. There is clearly pressure mounting, and the rise of the euro clearly does not help.

And my last comment on all this sort of deficit is aimed at my good friends in Beijing. It would be good for once if you were to recognise just how open the European economy is, the absence of structural barriers in the European Union to trade. To hear continued complaint about discrimination against Chinese firms on trade defence instruments, for instance, or about the threat posed by enlargement, is fairly irrelevant in this context.

A quick word on my meetings in Beijing. I was honoured to have the chance to meet again with Vice Premier Wu Yi, who as you all know has retained competences over trade issues, and to be the first external Minister to meet with the new MOFCOM Minister Bo. The meetings were very productive. We discussed first on the Doha Development agenda, and both sides basically agreed that this is a priority for us all. Secondly, we addressed a number of worries on both sides.

All this fits with the clear message we received from the Chinese leadership at the last Summit back in October: that EU-China relations have never been in better shape.

On our side, we are happy to agree with this positive judgement. The relationship is becoming multi-faceted, multi-layered, and rather deep. After our summit in October, for instance, we have instigated a very detailed and rather intense Policy dialogue.

This I think rather nicely illustrates at the same time both the importance attached by both sides to relations with the other, and the growing complexity of that relationship. It is becoming a mature relationship in which we are both able to raise problems without them becoming a major crisis.

And as part of that, the level of contact has moved to a different level. No fewer than 7 EU Commissioners are due to visit China in the first half of this year, including President Prodi in April, and I am very pleased he is also coming to Shanghai.

So can the honeymoon last?

The question is, in the early phase of a burgeoning new relationship between the EU and China: how can we make the honeymoon last? To which my answer is, appreciated perhaps by all young or indeed not so young couples, that you have to start working on that during the honeymoon, and not after the honeymoon.

So my message in Beijing today to both Mrs. Wu Yi and Minister Bo was that, in order to be sustainable, our bilateral relations should not only grow in quantitative but also in qualitative terms. This mirrors indeed the current concern of the Chinese leadership and one or two analysts about China's current economic growth (worrying less about the absolute figures than the actual content of that growth).

And let me in my talk today talk about one or two key themes by which we can boost the quality of our relationship.

Towards a quality relationship

From EU perspective, this means:

strengthening of our cooperation on DDA (and more on this subject later) and
moving now to address the still rather limited concerns amongst European industry that the current growth in our bilateral trade is not really positive for them.
I think there are 3 examples of this:

First, inevitably, is WTO implementation. As ever, there is progress in some areas, but a number of problems remain. On the positive side, China has now moved to lower the capital requirements in the insurance sector, bringing them more in line with international practice. And China has published the law on car financing, albeit two years behind schedule, and with some rather detailed concerns on our side.

But a large number of the problems we have been raising for a long time, and there are one or two new ones, which I had the chance to discuss with the Chamber Working Groups in Beijing last night:

Construction: Rather urgently, now, we hope China will reinstate "foreign contractor" status before current licences expire on 31 March 2004, in order to avoid EU construction companies being effectively forced out of China.
Banking: the new rules currently being drafted by CBRC do not solve the issues identified in the past and indeed add new problems. For example, we are worried about minimum capital and ratios and the requirement to deposit 30% of the working capital. I could go on: there is a longish list in this area.
And we are also getting rather worried about the development of multi-faceted industrial policies which, when fully implemented, will impact very negatively on the activity of foreign firms.
For example in the automobile sector, we have real concerns about some aspects of China's New Automobile policy, such as the separate distribution network, and the reclassification of tariffs for car parts.

No time here to go on to mention other long-standing concerns, such as IPR enforcement (which I have discussed with Mme Wu Yi and with Minister Bo), trading rights, telecoms issues, express courier problems. I am generally rather concerned that more than two years after accession to the WTO, we still have too many outstanding or delayed issues.

The second area I wanted to raise concerns China's policy on raw materials, where the growing number of market distortions to control access to these valuable commodities risks undermining the economic viability of some EU industry. For instance, shortages are now hitting us in both metal scrap and most recently by the effect of a significant drop of Chinese exports of coke since the start of this year, triggering sharp increases. In this and other areas, the Chinese have to observe normal and fair competition conditions on international markets in accordance with WTO rules.

And the final area I wanted to flag concerns the series of Chinese purchasing missions to the US. Everyone likes to go on shopping trips, including to the US, and particularly with the dollar where it is!. But just to reassure you here and others who may be listening that we are watching this whole area very carefully and in the particular sectors concerned, such as telecom equipment and automobile, to ensure that here too, action is in line with WTO commitments and is specifically non-discriminatory vis-à-vis other WTO members.

So these areas still need some work if we are to reassure European industry that the Chinese explosion onto the world scene is wholly good news, and to ensure that our relationship remains of high quality.

Before I close, a few words on where we are on the Doha Development Agenda, because this is something I have also discussed in some detail with Vice Premier Wu and Minister Bo. And here EU-Chinese cooperation may be one of the keys to unlock the door to the end of the round.

DDA

2004 is a crucial year for the Doha Round. We are now coming out of our post-Cancun swoon, with a real opportunity to make progress. My detailed contacts with China and other G20 countries, with the G90 group of developing countries, with the US, suggests a renewed commitment on the part of a lot of Members, developed and developing countries alike, to moving forward. The tonality, the body language of all the different participants is unrecognisably better, more positive, than it was last year.

So what can we achieve this year? We must translate the generalised political will into real negotiations and solutions in Geneva on specific points. And we should not waste time, but use the window of opportunity we have between now and the end of August. Why? Because the US has a mandate, and Bob Zoellick is pushing it. But we shouldn't expect much movement in the US after Labor Day, in the high season of political campaigning. And on the EU side, after 1 November, the current European Commission comes to an end of its mandate, and the odds are that both individuals, i.e. Commissioner Fischler and I, and/or our portfolios might change for the next five year period.

To ensure progress we need to focus on the essentials, such as agriculture, industrial tariffs, Singapore issues and development.

These are the four make or break questions on which decisions are needed. After this, I hope that the rest of the DDA will fall into place, if not immediately, then at least relatively easily.

On Agriculture, for instance, Europe is again ready to engage across the board, but all areas need seriously addressing by all WTO members: market access, export subsidies and domestic support side. We want the rich countries to offer access at zero duty for 50% of their imports from poor countries, for instance, and want a special safeguard for food security. We want the G20 and others to take seriously our proposal to eliminate export subsidies on a list of products of interest to DCs, and for others to take equally comprehensive commitments to dismantle their own means of export support. And we want to see progress on cotton as a key part of the agriculture negotiations.

On Industrial tariffs, we need a quick understanding on the nature of contributions that WTO members must make, corresponding to their capacity, size of market and level of development. It is clear that we should not ask for much tariff reduction from the very poor, the LDCs and small and vulnerable developing countries. There is a clear need here for protection of both markets and indeed revenue. But it equally clear that further progressive market opening also needs to really boost south-south trade. Linked to this idea, we hope to see some targeted market opening from the richer developing countries, such as the larger G-20 members.

And here, let me say that China has much to gain, in this and other areas of the negotiations. Of course we recognise that having just acceded to the WTO, she is something of a special case. She feels that having paid for breakfast, why should she also pay for lunch? Answer: if she is ready to make a contribution to the lunch bill, others will have to pay for dinner. By giving a little, she may gain a lot. Including in the south-south dimension, which is vital because a lot of the future growth in trade is going to be in the South.

The Singapore issues remain a key part of the agenda to get right. WTO members have now agreed that we should treat each issue on its own merits. We also believe that Trade Facilitation and Transparency in Government Procurement should remain part of the DDA Single Undertaking. Support for these issues is widespread. Secondly, on investment and competition, there is less support to pursue these in the Single Undertaking. But it would be a pity to lose them, because they are so relevant for the international trade system. One option would be for those WTO members who wish to, to go ahead in a transparent and open effort to anchor an agreement within the WTO. No-one, of course, should be forced to join up, and no-one would block others from moving forward. An idea worth looking at, in our view.

And finally, development, which is vital for the overall balance of the Round, and of our discussions on industrial tariffs and agriculture, for example. But we are ready to show further flexibility on the concept of special and differential treatment. And we all have to recognise that developing countries have different problems the smaller and weaker members, in particular, such as the least developed countries, the landlocked countries and the small island developing states, deserve particular consideration.

So while there is a lot of work to be done on the Round, there is every sign that people are ready to do that work. Our target is to be ready, by May, in Geneva, to arrive at the point we should have reached in Cancun, and thereafter, to see how far we can get. The benefits, after all, are high for both the EU and China.

Conclusions

In conclusion, and to allow some time for questions, of course we wish China was rather more active in pursuing the Round, in her own interests, and in the interests of the overall dynamic, but we will continue to work closely with the Chinese government on this point.

And I find the overall temperature of EU-China relations still very good. The pot is cooking well, but there are no signs of boiling over.

What we need to do, using the number of high level visits coming up, is to see what adjustments are needed during the honeymoon, to ensure a long and happy marriage. We may well face difficult issues in the coming weeks and months, and we have to tackle them in a mature way, in a way that reflects our ability to do business together.

