Developing Europe's External Policy in the Age of Globalisation

Central Party School

Beijing, China, 4 April 2002

A recent study by a political scientist if that is not an oxymoron from the United States suggests that much of the last century from 1914 to 1990 consisted of a long epochal war. Professor Philip Bobbitt who has been a White House advisor and is a historian of nuclear strategy argues that this long war embraced conflicts that we at present call the First World War, the Bolshevik Revolution, the Spanish Civil War, the Second World War, the wars in Korea and Vietnam and the Cold War. This seems to make the twentieth century even grimmer for those who endured it than perhaps it felt for many particularly during the second half.

I was born in 1944. My father was fighting with British forces in the Middle East. My wife who was also born in the same year never saw her own father. He was killed, before she was born, shortly after the D Day landings of Allied forces in France. Both of us have grown up and raised a family in what would have seemed to our parents' generation, or to our grandparents' generation, to be a time of remarkable peace and prosperity. Of course we have witnessed violence. But the nearest that it has come to touching me has been as a politician, associated with tackling the problem of Irish terrorism. By and large I seem to have lived through an era when things have got better for most people in my own region of the world year by year. Whether or not this will continue whether for example the events of last September in America are the harbinger of instability to come is something that I shall return to at the end of my remarks. But I have certainly had the good fortune to live through a period of extraordinary stability and growing affluence in Europe and that is the point from which I would like to start .

The establishment and development of the European Union is intimately associated with this prosperity and stability. In a period of about seventy years we had suffered three civil wars in Europe triggered though not wholly caused by the strategic animosity between France and Germany. The whole original purpose of the Founding Fathers of the European Union was to lash France and Germany together at the heart of a supranational entity which would involve its members in a pooling of sovereignty unique in the world's history. This political objective was to be pursued initially through economic means, at the beginning through the establishment of a coal and steel community.

There were originally six members of the European Union. That number has now grown to fifteen. We are likely to see the accession of ten more members by 2004 taking the population of the European Union to not far short of half a billion. It is worth noting that paradoxically there are more nation states today in Europe than ever before but nearly all of them are either already members of the European Union or wish to become members of the European Union.

Dismantling barriers against trade and the movement of people, goods and money, Europe has created a hugely successful single market with its own single currency. It has become the mightiest trading bloc in the world and provides 55% of all development assistance to poor countries or nearly two thirds of all grant aid. It is one of the most significant economic players on the world stage. And its economic importance to Asia in general and China in particular is clear. Before the Asian financial crash Asia had a surplus of €20 billion with the European Union; today that figure stands at around €125 billion and China's surplus alone at €45 billion. Europe is also a huge investor in China and Asia.

Between 1998 and 2000, Europe was the largest outside investor in China, in terms of utilised foreign investment, not including the diaspora. So as an economic giant, Europe is an important partner for America, for Japan, for China and that is likely to increase as the size of the Union itself expands and as the accession candidates which are quite poor today enjoy the faster economic growth that will almost certainly accompany their membership of our club.

While European Union countries share their sovereignty in many areas, they have not abandoned it altogether in some great supranational entity. In other words we are not witnessing the creation of a United States of Europe. The members of the Union will remain sovereign nation states. But they have chosen to work together sometimes supranationally sometimes inter-governmentally. In other words, sometimes we act as Europe sometimes we act as Europeans.

One mark of the nation state is that it retains ultimate responsibility for its own foreign and security policy and that is not going to change in Europe. Nevertheless there has been a growing recognition that we can accomplish more in the external field when we work together, pooling sovereignty, than when we operate as separate national entities.

This was brought home most clearly to European leaders during the bloody break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990's. Even though these problems were on our own geographical doorstep we seemed incapable of solving them. In the meantime up to a quarter of a million people died, millions became refugees and we were witnesses to a grim decade of mass graves and ethnic cleansing.

How was it, people asked, that we could make such an impact in economic matters on the world stage but be incapable of punching our weight politically? This was I think the main reason for the first halting steps towards the establishment of a European Common Foreign and Security Policy. We are trying to move from a foreign policy of communiqués and declarations full of strong nouns and weak verbs to something more substantive, more muscular, more focussed, that can have more impact.

Of course while the successes of the European Union have been mostly economic, one should not overlook the political implications of our development and of our increase in size. For example, when Spain, Portugal and Greece became members we were deliberately attempting to consolidate democracy in countries which had endured many years of authoritarian dictatorship. Equally, the planned enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe accomplishes a specific foreign policy objective. This policy of enlargement has I am sure been the main reason why the dismantling of the Soviet empire has been managed without a hard landing.

But what are we trying to do now with the Common Foreign and Security Policy? As I said earlier, this is not a single policy. We have not established a superstate. We do not seek an outcome in which Romano Prodi has his finger on the nuclear trigger. There will continue for the foreseeable future to be as many foreign ministers and foreign ministries as there are member states. They have different experiences and different perspectives. Spain will inevitably have a slightly different view of the world than Germany; Britain will look at things in a rather different way than France. Nevertheless what we seek to do - generally with some success - is to act together, as one.

We work to develop common policies which enable us to combine our diplomatic, economic and other strengths to achieve shared objectives. Javier Solana is the representative of Europe's foreign ministers in articulating and implementing the shared policies which they have agreed, and my job is to ensure that all the instruments that Member States have agreed to use at a European level for example in fields like development assistance, political cooperation and trade are brought together effectively in support of the agreed policies.

To give you some idea of how this works I would first of all like to deal with a conceptual issue, then to look at some of our geographical priorities, and finally to consider the impact of technology on foreign and security policy. Let me begin with the conceptual argument. A well known French student of international affairs, Dominic Moisi, recently suggested that there had developed a tripartite division of international responsibilities. He argued that the US fights, the UN feeds, and the EU funds.

There is a little truth in this. But overall it is an unfair caricature. European member states do for example take a significant part in security operations. Several European countries are part of the seventeen-strong coalition which is involved in the Afghan theatre at the moment. Most European member states are members of NATO and all of them including the non-NATO members have committed themselves to develop the military and non-military capacity to intervene more effectively in order to manage crises and prevent conflicts. There is also a growing debate in Europe about whether we should invest more in our own military capacity, for example in the development of precision guided munitions, airlift capacity, special forces and military telecommunications. Part of the aim would be to assume a greater share of the security burden particularly in our own neighbourhood. There is also a worry that the gap in the capacity to deploy force between the United States and Europe is growing to an alarming extent, to an extent indeed which could destabilise the Transatlantic Alliance. But we need to be realistic. The United States has recently announced a $48 billion increase in its defence budget. That is not an entrance fee to the high-tech security club that Europe can pay or I suspect would be allowed by its electors to pay.

But here we come to the conceptual argument which I want to address. Security is not only about military capacity. I notice that at international meetings these days, for example the meetings of G8 foreign ministers, while the agenda continues to range over the traditional problems of foreign policy (the dispute in Kashmir, the conflict in the Middle East and so on) more and more foreign ministers find themselves faced with issues which are rather new to the foreign policy debate. They have to address the relationship between security and the dark side of globalisation. They have to discuss the illicit trade in drugs, now a bigger export than cars or iron and steel. They have to discuss money laundering, which accounts for somewhere between 2 and 5% of global income. They focus on trafficking in human beings, international crime, terrorism, state failure. These are all problems which can only be resolved through international cooperation on an unprecedented scale. To tackle these problems we need international agreements, international rules and international institutions which can implement and police them. So we have to ensure that the United Nations and the other institutions of global governance can operate as effectively as possible.

We can no longer think of security in entirely military terms or simply in terms of defending state borders. We have seen the widespread development of nuclear weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction. We have seen the proliferation of other threats such as environmental degradation, disease, famine and migration that transcend state borders. Capital moves around the world at a speed and in quantities which limit the ability of states to manage their economic affairs on their own. Electronic communications transmit ideas around the world in a way that governments cannot control. On top of all this there is a growing recognition that human rights are universally valid. Put all these things together and you see that no nation state however mighty is sufficient unto itself. Not even the greatest countries can do everything on their own. What is required is multilateral cooperation. I believe that the main role of the European Union in international affairs must be to give teeth and bite to this multilateralism. We are the best example of institutionalised multilateralism, of the sharing of sovereignty for a common purpose. At the moment, international cooperation lags behind many of the consequences of globalisation. As I will argue later, we have to deal with this if we are not to suffer from greater insecurity.

There are of course times when the world's major power indeed the only superpower the United States has disagreed with some of the rest of us about multilateral solutions. That has happened for example over the environment and the Kyoto protocol. We regret that but where it happens we believe in Europe that we have to go ahead and take our own share of responsibility, in this case implementing the protocol and encouraging others to do so as well. We hope that in due course the United States will join us in this endeavour.

I want secondly to make a point about the geographical ambit of our policies. Given the varied histories and experiences of the member states of the European Union we have global interests and commitments. When I look at my diary over the last year I see this all too clearly.

This time last year I was returning from Latin America where I had been promoting our negotiations for a political and trade agreement with Chile and with the countries of MERCOSUR. Shortly after that I was in North Korea trying to develop a dialogue with Pyongyang and to support President Kim Dae Jung's sunshine policy of reconciliation on the Korean peninsular. I was in China for the meeting of foreign ministers from Asia and Europe and then in Vietnam for the ASEAN Regional Forum. In the autumn I was in Pakistan and Iran after the atrocities of 11 September negotiating an increase in development assistance for Pakistan and the opening of our European markets for their textiles. In Iran we were discussing the beginning of negotiations for a trade and cooperation agreement. Not long after that I was in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and five neighbouring African states trying with others to breathe some new life into the Lusaka peace process there. I don't say that in order to boast about the number of air miles I have in all I was travelling outside Brussels last year for about 150 days but only to indicate the breadth of Europe's external interests.

But not unreasonably much of our attention focuses on our "near abroad" that is, on what is happening in our own neighbourhood.

We have for example focussed a great deal on underpinning political and economic reform and the development of greater stability in the West Balkans. While there is still much to do in this region, the situation has been transformed over the last couple of years. Each of the countries in the region is now more or less democratic. Violence has abated. There is a commitment to reform.

We have used three instruments in order to help secure these objectives. First of all we are heavily involved in the security of the region. Eighty five percent of the soldiers in the West Balkans are from European countries. We are also helping to build and train the forces of law and order in a number of countries. Second we have one-sidedly opened our markets to goods from the Balkan countries. They have access to our markets for virtually all that they produce on the condition that they open their markets to one another as well. Thirdly we are providing a huge amount of development assistance to reconstruct the region. This year we will be spending about 800 million Euro and in all over six years we are spending 4.65 billion Euro. In addition, we are encouraging the Balkan countries to negotiate contractual agreements with us. If they keep their side of the bargain in reforming the way they manage their own affairs, we will accept them as potential members of the European Union. Once again, as in Central and Eastern Europe, we are using the prospect of EU membership as a specific and successful tool of foreign policy.

In the neighbourhood to our south we are particularly concerned that the Mediterranean does not become a geostrategic faultline with a prosperous Europe on one side and the poor Islamic world on the other. We are anxious to try to ensure that Professor Samuel Huntington's thesis about the clash of civilisations does not become self-fulfilling. The recent Gallup survey of opinion in nine Islamic countries gave a worrying picture of Islamic attitudes to Europe and America. We have in Europe a particular responsibility to deepen our dialogue with the Islamic world and to develop our political and economic partnership with countries of the Middle East and beyond.

We are trying in particular to create a free trade area and single market around the Mediterranean. If we can manage it, we would like to achieve this by the end of the present decade. We are also seeking to broaden our political cooperation with the countries along the Mediterranean shore to our south on issues like terrorism, the environment, drugs, and demographic change.

European and Islamic countries have shared a great deal of history, much of it turbulent. But we have learnt much from one another and our respective civilisations bear the imprint of our cultural interchange. We have to build bridges not burn them there is probably no more important a task for us. But that is not made easier by the continuing bitter feud between Israel and Palestine.

Third, an enlarged European Union will need to pay particular attention to our strategic relationship with our neighbours to the East, principally Russia and the Ukraine. It would for example be destabilising if we were to allow a gulf in living standards and standards of government to open up between the European Union and its eastern neighbours. We have supported, not least financially, economic and political reform in Russia and the Ukraine, and we have begun discussions with Russia about creating a common European economic space which will allow us to trade and invest with each other more easily. It is a strategic imperative for us to strengthen our relationship with Russia and we have already seen many of the suspicions of the past melt away.

The last issue that I wanted to deal with briefly is the impact of technology on the foreign and security policy debate or to be more precise the impact of globalisation.

There is of course a sense in which we have been living in a global economy ever since the sailing ship was first launched. When Chinese fleets were sailing the world's seas (before the defeat of the Eunuchs' party at court in the middle of the fifteenth century) one could I suppose have claimed that globalisation was taking hold. Equally, the opening of markets in the last years of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the massive movement of people within continents and between continents were plainly manifestations of globalisation. But what is different today is that by destroying and cheapening distance technology increases the impact of market opening and trade liberalisation and speeds up the results. So, typically, where it took European economies after the industrial revolution a century or so to double their national wealth Asian countries have managed that during the present technological age in 10 or 20 years.

By and large most people have seen their lives transformed by globalisation. They live longer. They are healthier. And they are more prosperous. The improvement of living standards for so many in China has itself had a global impact. However while many people have seen real improvements in living standards, too many have been left behind. Throughout the 1990's 1.2 billion people around the world were living on less than a dollar a day. One fifth of humanity takes home four fifths of global income. During the next twenty years the world's population is set to grow from six to eight billion and most of this increase will be in the poorest countries.

Globalisation is of course not only an economic process. It has a dark side. As I said earlier, we have to contend with drug trafficking, international organised crime, trafficking in human beings, terrorism, epidemic disease, the sexual exploitation of children, money laundering and so on.

The poor suffer most from these evils. But rich countries cannot isolate themselves from the effects of these problems. I remember visiting South Africa during the apartheid years and going just a couple of miles from a rich suburb in Johannesburg to the poverty of a shanty town. The well-off white middle class thought it could survive unscathed behind its high suburban walls and its security guards. It was wrong. It would be similarly wrong if the developed world thought that it could ignore the problems of the developing world without reaping a whirlwind.

If there had been better public health systems in Africa and other poor countries would Aids be such a global menace today? Half the tuberculosis cases in the United States originate abroad mostly in poor countries. Europe sees an important part of its external role in helping to make globalisation fairer and more acceptable to those who are presently marooned in misery. We cannot stop globalisation. It would be like trying to stop time. But we can make it more balanced.

So we are determined, not least after the agreement at Doha on a new WTO round, to make the world trading system fairer for the poor. We not only want to give them improved access to the markets in richer countries but ensure as well that they can take advantage of this market opening.

We want to increase development assistance. That is what we pledged ourselves to do at Monterrey. We want to reach a bargain with poor countries that we will provide them with more assistance in return for them committing themselves to higher standards of governance.

And we want as well to strengthen the international institutions that I mentioned earlier which are essential if the rules of international economic life are to be fair to everyone.

With developments in nuclear physics in the 1920's we asserted the centrality of man, of the individual, in the sweep of history. But at the same time this scientific advance unlocked a terrible threat to man's very survival. I think there is a sense in which the forces represented by globalisation pose the same dilemma today. The technology which speeds up and increases the impact of globalisation can also empower the individual. But it has the capacity as well to bury the individual and devastate the communities that he cherishes.

I have not spoken specifically today about the relationship between Europe and China. But you only have to reflect for a moment on the points I have raised to see how much value we attach to that relationship. The integrity and effectiveness of multilateralism and success in making globalisation fairer for more people depend crucially on what happens in China, on your relationship with the rest of the world, and on your relationship with us. We recognise that your relationship with the United States, the world's only superpower, is probably the key geostrategic relationship of the coming century. We all have to define ourselves in relationship to a country so powerful militarily, culturally and economically. It is worth recalling for example that between 1995 and 2000 forty percent of the world's growth came in the United States. But the importance of your relationship with America, and of our own relationship with that country should not belittle the value of our relationship with each other. Nor should we see the Sino-Europe relationship entirely through the prism of our respective attitudes and partnerships with the United States. We have free-standing interests that can deepen our partnership and our relationship in both the political and economic fields. I suspect it is also true that with your sense of history and ability to think in the long term you have a fairly clear idea of how Europe is likely to look as a partner of twenty-five countries or even more in the decades to come.

Shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the end of the Cold War a Japanese-American writer, called Francis Fukayama wrote a book with the captivating title "The End of History". To be fair to the author, he did not mean the end of interesting times. What he was arguing was that the sharp and divisive ideological debates of the twentieth century were over. Now that may be a point with which you would take issue, but it is certainly true that most countries had come to accept by the last decade that markets should be the principal allocator of resources and the barriers to trade should be hauled down. Fukayama would also argue that most had come to accept that market economics should be underpinned by the rule of law and by parliamentarianism.

But the decade that began with that book ended with rather gloomier predictions. An American writer called Robert Kaplan (whose earlier work on the Balkans was said to be very influential in shaping President Clinton's thinking, and whose latest work is said to be much admired by President Bush) wrote a book called "The Coming Anarchy" in which he forecast that we could all look forward to living in a more dangerous and brutal world. I don't myself for one moment believe that that is inevitable. Yet whether we can avoid such a fate depends on the decisions we take as an international community and the policies we pursue. Your own role representing as you do between a fifth and quarter of humanity will be a key. It is in everyone's interest that the economic and political development of your country should be managed smoothly.

Let me mention one other Western writer. When the novelist Doris Lessing, a committed communist in the 1940's and 1950's, came to write her memoirs at the end of the 1990's, she suggested that perhaps she should leave out any political comment since everyone seemed to regard politics these days as pretty irrelevant. My own view is that politics is going to be as important in the next few years as it has ever been. Your own leaders will be seeking to balance economic, social and political development. And the world's leaders should be trying to create an international infrastructure that will make the world a safer and more prosperous place. Despite recent obsessions with economics, politics has not had its day, indeed the art of wise political leadership will be required as much as ever before.