When President Barroso asked me to represent him in opening this Summit with the Prime Ministers and Minister Bo Xilai, I agreed with great pleasure. It is heartening to see European and Chinese companies gathered here. On President Barroso's behalf, I extend a warm welcome to you all.

The clear message I want you to take away today is this: the new European Commission recognises the economic importance of China and will place it firmly and centrally on its radar screen. We must review and lift our relations with China to a new and higher, more intense level. We should ask - are the conditions ripe to establish a new more comprehensive, overarching framework for the EU China relationship. Why do I say this?

We are polities at the extremities of the same land mass. Asia and Europe are no longer separate, far-away Continents. It is, if you like, a defining moment in history. Of course, it is a truism that the world has become smaller as a result of globalisation. But forget the rhetoric. Europeans have to sit up and take notice because in absolute and relative terms, China is a huge phenomenon to be reckoned with.

China is the great change of our time. This is to your credit, Prime Minister, and to that of your predecessor Zhu Ronghji and others. Since Deng Xiaoping opened the door to the outside world some twenty five years ago, per capita income in China has doubled, and then doubled again, and then doubled once more. Within that single generation more than three hundred million people have been lifted out of poverty. A peasant society is urbanising apace. Once one of the most inward-looking countries, China has become the world's largest consumer of steel, copper and cement, and an export powerhouse as well.

China has been through no “Big Bang”, no economic collapse, and no sudden, unplanned liberalisation and privatisation: so different from the Soviet Union and its former Empire, as China's leaders have always pointed out. China's leaders have pursued intelligent, step by step economic reforms , in which each change is built on the confidence earned from a successful earlier change.

There is an expression in Chinese that says that “you must cross the river by feeling the stones.” That has been your recipe for success: pragmatism combined with a determined sense of purpose and direction.

In the past 25 years China's foreign trade has increased by an average 15% a year. It will pass the 1 trillion dollars threshold for the first time in 2004.

Europeans must ask themselves profound questions about what this means for them, the world economy, global institutions and the way they are run, and the challenges facing humanity. How can we anticipate the possible expansion of China by a further factor of four in the next 25 years?

My first point is that we must act together as Europeans. The European Union should be the central vehicle for a new policy of higher level engagement. Member States, even our largest, are too small to address the challenges posed by China on their own. A more intensive political interaction can pave the way for the economic exchange that will inevitably bind us closer together. Interdependence will grow: politically we must decide how we wish to depend on each other, and what rules should apply.

Second, the resurgence of China should not stir up fear of China. Make the mistake of treating someone as a threat and it becomes a self fulfilling prophecy. In fact I believe quite the opposite. We are not fundamentally that different. We are facing many of the same challenges. Both of our peoples live in densely populated parts of the world. Nature has given us relatively less agricultural land than other countries. We both have relatively less energy resources too. For different reasons our populations will face the same huge demographic challenge after 2015, with a smaller base of working people relative to retired citizens.

Europeans and Chinese share similar work ethics and an attachment to a solid social fabric. Although you are less wealthy today than we are, you wish a society where talents flourish but where individuals show responsibility to each other. So do we.

I have been told that the Dutch in their zeal to trade are sometimes referred to as the Chinese of Europe. As a Brit I am tempted to reply, perhaps that is true, but the greatest days of the Dutch in Europe were in the seventeenth century before the Brits came along. Be that as it may, you in China have become traders like the Dutch and English, and we admire your industriousness.

But let's not forget that in earlier times the capacity to trade depended only too often on the capacity to put cannons on boats and finance marauding missions. This has changed thanks not least to the establishment of a rules-base trading system. WTO is creating the stability, predictability and confidence in the trading system that cannons could never inspire.

In today's world, I am suggesting that we should make more room at the table for China. But as business people, you know that there is no such thing as a free lunch. With privilege comes responsibility.

In the economic field, China has pursued very courageous reforms and is making strides towards becoming a full market economy. Europe is looking to China today for further change, which is politically possible, precisely because you have developed a stable and competitive foundation of trading success. You have built the world's second largest foreign exchange reserves, now over $500 billion, which are a solid guarantee of stability and confidence. This makes it possible for you to contemplate a step by step liberalisation of your financial and exchange rate policy, so that they become more responsive to market forces. Reforms I know are underway, but I would urge you to build on these as rapidly as you can.

A second overarching responsibility of China is to the WTO. As a member since 2001, it is now your organisation; indeed you are one of its four or five most important members.

The WTO depends on you to flourish. Some doubt China's commitment to the Doha negotiations, on the grounds that you have already made your WTO contribution through your accession. Prime Minister, may I suggest that the success of the Doha Development Agenda is in your interest. We all need a balanced package on agriculture, tariffs, services, intellectual property, and tighter use of anti-dumping measures.

We must devote equal effort in Brussels and Beijing to press others to bring the DDA to a successful conclusion. The smaller, more vulnerable countries at the outer edges of world trade need the DDA's benefits as life support. And both of us need the WTO to grow in strength because we have a common interest in developing strong and impartial international organisations.

At the end of this month China reaps its first huge dividend from WTO membership, with the final removal of textile quotas: a remarkable triumph for the WTO system given the upheaval that the final fulfilment of this longstanding commitment is likely to cause. This liberalisation is a major prize for you. But I would urge you to be sensible about the growth of your exports - not to stop you exporting a lot more, but to moderate the growth of those exports - over a reasonable time period. Not for the sake of domestic protection in Europe, but in recognition that in countries, for example, like Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Mauritius, the fate of millions of workers hangs by some fraying textile threads. They face the prospect of harsh upheaval, grim poverty and possibly civil unrest if they are not given time to adjust to the new competition from China.

This is not the time to go through a checklist of EU-China current trade issues. We discuss these in a frank and constructive spirit, and I want to thank personally Minister Bo for the efforts to solve the export restrictions on Chinese coke earlier in the year.

Standing in for my President, I will also want to make a few remarks about our political relationship. In my view, and together with my colleague Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner, I believe that our response to future social and environmental and even geopolitical challenges is likely to be comparable. Our interests in many areas, like global warming, in the long run coincide. In our foreign policy we both privilege the use of soft power instruments.

We both share an interest in being partners not rivals with the most powerful nation in the world – the United States. We look to China to play a greater role from your country in international peace-keeping. The world needs the enormous contribution you can make.

Also, both in Europe and China we can improve our protection of human rights. So we should vigorously pursue our dialogue on this, based on mutual respect, confidence, and a wish to improve ourselves. As a one-time television journalist, before I exchanged this vocation for the calm waters of professional politics, I know the value of an open media for a vibrant, mature society.

The phenomenal success of your economic reforms should now have created the foundation and confidence for bolder moves. Internally for more political reform. Externally for stronger regional cooperation in North East Asia. In post war Europe, economics was the motor of European integration, but the driver was a genuine desire for post war reconciliation. In this, I hope Europe's recent history still has something to teach your region.

So I come back to where I started: the need for a stronger framework for the EU China relationship. Our current agreement dates from 1985. It does not tackle barriers that remain between our economies and which fall outside the remit of the WTO, nor does it provide a framework for overseeing other issues of mutual interest, such as migration. Would we not both benefit from a strong overarching framework that enables us to work further on new areas like readmission agreements, energy and transport, science and technology?

On the trade side this could imply going beyond the WTO in such areas like investment or government procurement. During your visit to Brussels in May this year, you Prime Minister Wen have said that intellectual property rights were in the minds of the Chinese as well. And we want to engage you on choices you are making for your telecommunications market, like the next generation 3G standard.

I have a sense that business would certainly be interested in the opportunities that a new Agreement could bring. At this juncture, I would like to express a word of thanks to the Dutch Presidency and Dutch business who have so ably organised the event in conjunction with the Europe-China Business Summit.

In conclusion, Prime Ministers, Minister Bo, I am honoured to have been able to address you. I hope that in the years ahead we will see real substance develop in an ever deeper relationship. If that is your wish, you can count on my every endeavour as Europe's trade Commissioner to deliver upon it.

Thank you.

