Dear Mr. Vice Chairman, Dear Mr. Dean, Excellencies, students, ladies and gentlemen,

It is always a pleasure to be in Beijing, and it is a particular pleasure to have the opportunity to address students from such a prestigious university.

You represent China's future at a time when China's role, and its relations with the EU are of crucial importance.

The EU and China are comprehensive strategic partners. That is a phrase you may have often heard. But what does it mean in practice?

It means a number of things. It includes our strong bilateral co-operation on political issues including international and regional issues, such as climate change and non-proliferation as well as the economy and trade, and co-operation on a huge range of different sectors, from transport, to science and technology, health, culture and education.

It also includes our role working together in an international context, co-operation to address today's global challenges.

Our partnership is strong and growing. During my visit I met with a number of your senior leaders: NPC Chairman Wu, State Councillor Tang, Foreign Minister Li and Vice-Minister of Commerce Yi. We agreed to launch negotiations on a new bilateral agreement which will update the legal base for our relations and more accurately reflect this strong and growing partnership.

I will try to cover these points in more depth today.

I am always surprised by the extent and speed of the physical change in China, and in Beijing in particular.

Though I am sure you have heard this observation from many visitors who have graced this podium before me, that makes it no less true.

To take one small example: 1000 new cars are sold everyday in Beijing. The number of cars on Beijing's roads doubled between 2000 and 2005 to 2.6 million. By 2008 the Beijing municipal transport commission estimates that the number will rise to 3.2 million. For me, that means half a million cars have been added to Beijing's roads since the last time I visited just over 1 and a half years ago.

You all know the impressive macro-economic and trade statistics as China has risen to become the world's fourth economy and third trading power.

I am interested not just in the obvious physical changes or the less visible societal changes which necessarily accompany growth on this scale.

I am also interested in the implications of this complex background for China's growing presence on the world stage and its relationship with the EU and other international partners.

The EU is also going through a period of change.

This is my first bilateral foreign visit in 2007, and consequently my first since Romania and Bulgaria became full EU members. This enlargement is important for the EU as a whole, but also important in demonstrating the EU's growing soft power and the attractiveness of a model which encourages dialogue, co-operation and integration. Enlargement is one of the most successful policies of the EU, an extraordinary achievement in exporting freedom and opportunity across our continent.

Since the current Commission took office, there have been new initiatives on areas as diverse as maritime policy and mobile phones, postal services, immigration and enlargement. Externally, we – with China and the wider international community – have been able to offer a comprehensive response to the crisis in Lebanon, bring political influence, humanitarian aid and economic support into play

The Commission's strategy for taking Europe forward has been an ambitious set of policies targeted directly on citizens' interests, and at the same time charting a path to take the Union forward towards an institutional settlement. The endorsement of this approach by member states last summer marked the shift from the period of reflection to a period of more active engagement, engagement which will continue to intensify in 2007 during the German Presidency.

I benefit from visiting immediately following a series of detailed discussions in the EU looking at our policy towards and relations with China.

We carried out a full analysis and reframing of our policy: do we really have the comprehensive strategic partnership to which both sides aspire? Can we do more to meet our responsibilities to each other? Or work more closely together to tackle today's global challenges?

The results are reflected in policy papers agreed by the Commission and Member States. These papers represent a positive call for a sensible and necessary evolution in our partnership, to strengthen and broaden it and to make sure both sides can meet the challenges of the years ahead.

We also explored practical suggestions to underpin our relations, which for the EU side means simple measures such as strengthening our China expertise and understanding, our language capabilities, our science and technology co-operation, our support to European businesses. I do not expect your Foreign Minister will be able to address students in the EU in Chinese in the same way I am addressing you in English any time soon. But we want to strengthen the basis for our relations as far as possible.

There are 2 overarching themes which I would like to touch on here. The first is partnership.

When relations are going well, we often forget to mention the good parts. Science and technology co-operation is a real success story and continues to strengthen, as our EU-China Year of Science demonstrated, as does education with the EU now the destination of choice for over 100.000 Chinese students. Our bilateral trade, which captures media interest most, is in to surpass the 2005 total of 206 billion euros in 2006, with the EU as China's number 1 trade partner and China number 2 for the EU.

It is normal that divergences tend to grab the headlines. But our divergences are surprisingly few: that is a measure of the quality of our partnership. Yes, there have been disagreements, on for example trade relations, but given the volume of trade, I think we have a good record, both on keeping disputes to a minimum, and working to resolve them when they arise. This shows the maturity of the relationship that we raise these questions together.

Together the EU and China represent almost 1 third of the world's population. We have common goals and interests, in effective multilateralism, in peace, security and stability. That is an important basis for our partnership.

The second is responsibility. This is a positive theme: that the EU, like many other international partners, wants to see China continue on its path to playing a full and active role in the international system. That meets meeting a number of challenging responsibilities, increasingly I hope it also means China becoming more proactive and involved in setting the international agenda. We have seen very constructive Chinese engagement, for instance, on North Korean issues and Iran.

I have had a number of productive meetings with your leaders. They not only accept the basic premise that China, like all other countries, has a growing number of international responsibilities. But they are doing more and more to meet them.

I should respond to 2 points raised by some academics when examining the question of responsibility.

Firstly they argue that the burden should not fall on China alone: this demand must not be one-sided. I agree completely. The EU should not ask of China what it is not prepared to do itself, whether granting market access or combating climate change.

But the inverse must also hold true. How many more of the cars I mentioned could have been built by European companies in China but for limits on investment?

Secondly they argue that China remains a developing country, and is not quite so accountable as a result. I do not want to question the position in China that it is a developing country. I can fully understand the grounds for putting that case forward.

But seen from outside, China is not a classic developing country and it bears many of the hallmarks of an industrialised, developed country. These realities also have to be taken into account, as do China's size, influence and impact.

But what's in it for China? I would argue that active and responsible international engagement is of crucial importance to China.

China's decision to play a full role in existing international structures and systems will help decide how effective those systems are or, indeed, whether they continue to exist in their current form.

That is why I think the only valid option for China is one of shared responsibility, and increasingly one of leadership. And the EU supports that.

I want to flag up 3 of the key international challenges we will face in the year ahead. For all of them, the international community needs China to take an active role, and again I believe it is in China's fundamental interests to do so. Global challenges do not respect national borders.

1) Tackling weapons proliferation. China has been an increasingly proactive player; at the centre of diplomatic initiatives with a dangerously unstable North Korea; contributing troops to UN operations in Lebanon; and working hand in hand with the EU and with the other permanent members of the UN Security Council on the Iranian nuclear issue. I hope this co-operation can continue and strengthen.

2) Working closely with African partners to ensure sustainable development and security. The Summit in Beijing at the end of last year was a reminder that China is already an important donor country and development actor.

It was also a reminder that China's appetite for energy resources and raw materials has provoked a flow of Chinese investment and engagement beyond its continental frontiers.

Now China's presence in Africa should evolve into a wide and responsible contribution to Africa's development challenges. China's record has at times been open to question by the international community, but steps in the right direction are welcome.

3) Energy, the environment and climate change. This is perhaps the most obvious ‘global' challenge, and the compelling evidence published by the international economist Nicholas Stern reinforces the magnitude and urgency of the challenge.

We share common interests and responsibilities in ensuring the security and sustainability of energy supplies, improving efficiency and mitigating the environmental impact of energy production.

We have a joint responsibility for managing what is both a finite resource and the key element in climate change. Joint projects such our flagship commitment to develop near zero emission coal technology form a central element to our response.

We have a Climate Change Partnership, where as well as our bilateral co-operation, we are working to strengthen international co-operation, meeting shared responsibilities under the Climate Change Convention and Kyoto Protocol.

The EU has recently taken steps to ensure aviation is included in action to tackle climate change. To use the EU as a specific example, without action, projected growth in our aviation emissions risks offsetting more than 25% of the EU's impact reductions required under the Kyoto protocol.

Our emissions trading scheme puts the EU at the forefront of this important area. But clearly this has to be placed in a wider multilateral context; that means working with the international civil aviation organisation, but also with key partners like China.

I have listed 3 areas, but the same logic of responsibility and leadership applies to migration. Or organised crime. Or international terrorism.

These are questions on which China has major national interests and clear international responsibilities. But increasingly it also has new capacity – and I hope willingness – for a proactive response.

One of the key decisions at the EU-China Summit in Helsinki last September was agreement to launch negotiations of new Framework Partnership and Co-operation Agreement, or PCA.

The challenges I have just mentioned will feature in our discussions. So will many others.

It is clear that EU-China relations have moved on significantly from the tentative trade-based relationship which formed the backdrop to the 1985 Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement.

The new PCA will update the 1985 Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement and form a comprehensive basis which more accurately covers the whole range of our political, economic and trade relationship, as well our huge range of sectoral co-operation. In itself, it is a very ambitious undertaking because it will provide legal and political basis for our strategic partnership for the decades to come.

I agreed the launch of these negotiations following meetings with the Chinese leadership and with Foreign Minister Li yesterday evening, beginning what may be a lengthy process, but one which I am sure that in a spirit of partnership we can use to build a new and stronger base for our co-operation.

There is more good news. I am happy to announce that during my visit we have reached an agreement on the opening of a Europe-China School of Law, which will help us mutually to better understand our respective legal systems. The School will offer young professionals and legal experts the capacity to exercise their talents and skills with perfect knowledge of Chinese, European, and international law.

The School will offer postgraduate-degree courses as well as professional training for career development.

The EU and China agreed a strategic partnership in 2003 and we have an excellent basis to build on to ensure we realise this.

Most importantly I think our relations are now mature. They are mature enough to tackle any differences we have, mature enough to understand and take each others interests into account, and mature enough to realise the wider impact and importance of our partnership.

In terms of public consumption this can lead to a paradox. As the maturity and quality of our partnership improves, we are prepared to (and need to) tackle areas of divergence, areas we may have skirted over before. These divergences might decrease in number but become more visible.

But I think this is a mark of maturity and one we should not shy away from. I can assure my Chinese interlocutors that I will continue to deliver clear messages on areas like social and political freedoms, intellectual property rights and fair trade. But I am also assured that they will respond and that our dialogue will continue and improve.

I took note of a traditional new year couplet which I heard Foreign Minster Li use recently:

"Thousands of beautiful silk rolls have been unrolled in the year of Dog; hundreds of steps will be climbed in the Year of Pig."

As EU-China relations move forward, and as we begin to negotiate the PCA, the year of the pig will be a busy one. But I hope we will make rapid progress climbing the steps together.