Introduction

I am delighted to be here in Zhongshan University to say a few words about the importance of EU-China commercial relations.

The story of Guangdong province

And there can be no better place to talk about EU-China trade relations than the famous Guangdong province, the very byword for Chinese economic power and potential.

Guangdong of course was the home of China's first modern revolutionary organisation, Sun Yat-Sen's United League, back in the 1920s. And Sun himself founded Zhongshan University. Guangdong has now become synonymous with another modern revolution in China, the extraordinary economic reforms that have taken root since Deng's Open Door Policy of 1978. Of course, as real estate dealers like to say when selling houses, the key question is "location, location, location", and Guangzhou in particular has a history of using its location on the Pearl River delta to great effect.

But Guangdong province always had more than just proximity to Hong Kong: it had a tradition of contacts with the outside world on which to draw; and an innate commercial flair. When Deng came to South China in 1992, and said boldly that Guangdong should become Asia's "fifth tiger", his statement unleashed the tide of inward investment and economic growth to the point that - as you know - Governor Lu has recently and rather confidently - predicted that Guangdong would surpass the other four tigers within the next few years. Today, the Pearl River delta pulls in one quarter of China's foreign direct investment and is responsible for an astonishing one third of China's total exports. And as reported in the Far Eastern Economic Review, Guangdong Galanz Enterprise, now accounts for 40% microwave ovens sold in Europe.

I tell you this as a demonstration of what I was taught, some years ago, in university: always begin a speech by telling the audience something it already knows, and agrees with. I know I am preaching to the converted when I say how impressive your economic performance has been for the last twenty years. As the Economist newspaper put it only last week, the story is of "the emergence of an industrial region so huge as to transform global trading patterns and investment flows".

But as the people of this region also understand very well, with great successes come great challenges. If Guangdong is a microcosm of modern globalisation, it is not surprising that there is a downside of economic success that has to be managed as well as an upside to be enjoyed.

First, how do you ensure that your public services keep pace with your economic performance ? As Governor Lu said with great candour, even in Guangdong, there are still nearly a million families too poor to send their children to school. Second, how do you ensure that the local environment is not dramatically affected by economic growth? Talking to people today in this area, it is clear to me that Guangdong itself is the first to admit that the rapidity of economic change has posed great environmental challenges in areas such as air and water pollution. And thirdly, when you have set such a pattern, such a rhythm, of economic growth for such a sustained period, how do you cope when export growth, indeed growth itself, starts to flag as happened at the end of the last decade?

It was hardly surprising in the context of the rest of the Asian crisis of 1998, and the slowdown was less severe than in many other places, but it demonstrated that nowhere on this planet is safe from recession.

In two words, and it is clear to me that this is what Guangdong province is reaching for, how do you ensure sustainable development ? That is the challenge we face globally, and it is very topical to be able to address this just a couple of months after the Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable Development. The thesis I want to put to you today is twofold: firstly, that one of the absolute keys to sustainable development is developing tools of global governance; and secondly, that EU and China are emerging as two of the key poles of the global governance system, and so our co-operation becomes even more vital.

To illustrate this general point, I would like to focus in detail on two aspects in particular: first, how much China and the EU are already working together in the new trade round in the World Trade Organisation, the Doha Development Agenda. And secondly, the continuing importance of implementing Chinese WTO accession commitments. These two aspects were also the two key points I discussed with Chinese Ministers in Beijing yesterday, and these two points - I was not surprised to see came up again and again during my all too brief tour of Guangdong.

But perhaps the business school students that are present here will forgive me if I begin with a short discussion of the growing importance of EU-China trade relations. The Chinese trade numbers - of course often driven from the strength of the local economy here in Guangzhou - are startling: both your imports and exports have more than doubled in just the last five years. And of course, while unlike some we never complain about bilateral trade deficits, it hasn't escaped our notice that the EU trade deficit with China has more than doubled in the same period, and now stands at a rather substantial 45 billion euros on Eurostat figures in 2001, our largest single bilateral trade deficit.

Indeed, I also had the chance when in Beijing to point out to Chinese Ministers, such as my counterpart, Shi Guangsheng, how open the EU economy is to Chinese products. For example, even in relatively difficult economic times, such as in 2001, when total imports into the EU declined by 1%, Chinese imports rose by 8%. And even in textiles, and Minister Shi, of course is a fully trained textiles negotiator, and constantly tells me that the EU has a restrictive policy, Chinese imports rose in 2001 by one and a half times the global figure [6% vs 4%]. As I said to Zhu Rongji in Copenhagen last month, despite Chinese concerns about EU anti-dumping policy, only 0.5% of total EU imports are subject to trade defence measures, such as anti-dumping. So we effectively have our own version of the "Open Door" policy, launched by Deng back in 1978. The EU really is open to trade with China.

Last year, I came to China just after the very successful Doha Ministerial meeting, which saw not only Chinese accession to the WTO finally confirmed, but also of course the launch of the Doha Development Agenda. One year on, I am of course very keen to see and learn how WTO implementation is happening in practice, so I want to hear your views on that, and in particular what impacts you have noticed here in Guangzhou. And I would also like to discuss the new WTO Round, which was also of course launched last year in Doha, because I think it is an excellent example of how the EU and China can, should, indeed must work together in the new global economy.

WTO accession: implementation

But let me start with a pivotal, perhaps the pivotal question, and that is an assessment of how China is managing thus far in the WTO. Seen from Brussels, the overall assessment is a positive one.

I say "overall" because the picture is not 100% rosy. There remain some serious difficulties, but on balance the positives are bigger than the negatives. We are following with great interest the enormous efforts China is making to put in place a stronger legislative framework, whether this is in relation to intellectual property, or services, or at the technical level, the structure for quota and tariff-rate quota management, etc. There is no doubt in my mind that China and her leadership is extremely eager to demonstrate that China will respect her WTO obligations in full.

Of course, from the perspective of EU industry and indeed the export sector in China, the key is how these commitments are being translated into action on the ground in terms of your ability to carry out your day to day business. I fully recognise that even implementing the letter of WTO commitments is not easy to do, particularly in a vast and diverse country like China. But abiding by the spirit of WTO rules will be even more of a challenge. By this, I mean that it is relatively straightforward - from an administrative viewpoint - to deliver lower tariffs, for example. Much harder to set in place the necessary mechanisms and structure to ensure full transparency and predictability. I fully recognise that this means for China (as it has meant for others) a step change in day to day business practice.

There are a number of short term issues to address. For example, if China is still to attract such a major share of inward investment, she needs to consider carefully the way foreign companies are treated in one or two areas. Clearly, companies will only open new branches, for example, if they feel they are going to be profitable. But such decisions are coloured, for example in the banking sector, by the requirements for new capital of 100 million RMB per licence, and no fewer than 6 licenses are needed to cover the full scope of banking activities. Of course as a former banker, I never question legitimate prudential concerns, and I would be the last to do so in China's case, which is after all still developing its banking sector. But I have to wonder if these requirements are not disproportionate, when you consider that only € 5 million is required to establish in the EU a subsidiary benefiting from the single banking passport.

Allied to these teething problems is the transitional nature of a lot of the Chinese commitments in the WTO. A lot of the benefits only come on stream over a period of several years, in the services sector (banking, insurance) as well as for goods (with full trading rights being granted only 3 years after accession). Of course, I know this well, having negotiated some of these provisions myself only two or so years ago. But it is not always easy for either Chinese or European industry - when the true position will not be clear (in some sectors) for the next three to five years. And as Zhu Rongji said to me himself, China still has to take a decision - herself - on the next stage of liberalisation in sectors such as telecoms and insurance.

But I also want to stress that we are taking a distinctively European approach to problems of WTO accession. For example, in the ongoing discussions in Geneva on Chinese WTO accession under the so-called Transitional Review Mechanism, our approach has been to avoid taking a narrow legalistic approach, but to address problems in a rather positive way with China. We are focused on results, and concrete actions by the Chinese side, such as on protection of intellectual property rights, for example. It is one thing to ensure that the framework of legislation is in line with international standards, and quite another to ensure that enforcement, particularly against piracy and counterfeiting, is rigorously pursued, and this is of course another area where wer are very keen to see action from the Chinese side.

Finally, in terms of the longer term, we will not forget the importance of technical assistance, i.e., the financial support Europe gives to China in order to improve its implementation of WTO commitments.

I have argued in the past that the date of Chinese accession was not so much the finishing line as the starting line in terms of meeting WTO standards. The EU is absolutely committed to helping China in this difficult transitional period. We are currently finalising the design of a major new programme, worth 15 million euro, which together with a Chinese contribution of 5.6 million euro, makes up the largest technical assistance programme supporting China's integration into the international trading system. In terms of current or recent co-operation projects with China, this adds up to EU support of around € 22M.

And - final word on this - what does this mean in terms of the final stage, of going to WTO dispute settlement proceedings if we do not manage to solve a particular dispute ? Some have speculated that we will not want to "upset" China by going to dispute settlement resolution. Well this is untrue. I am absolutely ready to go to the WTO where other courses of action have produced no effective results. But we don't, I think, help matters by dragging China into the WTO at the first sign of a problem. Our preferred approach is to recognise the size of the challenge, and to try to build confidence in the systems, both in the EU and China, to facilitate trade. Of course I am ready to go to the WTO if necessary, but only if other methods fail.

To conclude on this point, we are keen of course that China should implement faithfully her WTO commitments, and we want to help in this regard. Overall, as I said in the beginning, the signs are pointing in the right direction: not least because Zhu Rongji himself believes, and has said in the past, that WTO accession directly assists China's own internal reform programme, and sets China firmly on the path towards sustainable development.

The Doha Development Agenda

Perhaps I could now turn to the second dish on this afternoon's menu, and that is the Doha Development Agenda, the new Round of trade negotiations in the WTO. And this, too, I believe to be good news for China.

This statement might at first appear a little odd. Why should China, after 15 years' long march into the WTO, after many years of tough bargaining to establish the price of its WTO entry ticket, wish to be immediately plunged again into fresh negotiations, in the first new multilateral round of trade talks we have launched since 1986 ? But I am absolutely delighted that the Chinese leadership has so quickly grasped the significance of what is at stake in the Doha Development Agenda that we launched in November of last year. This project is of huge, huge significance at the present time.

First, the economic prognosis is not promising. We face difficult times ahead in the world economy, difficulties which frankly a war in the Middle East will only serve to exacerbate. So it is even more important, in this context, that the WTO comes up with rather rapid results to stimulate medium term growth and improve economic stability.

But secondly, a crucial part of this is not just the further liberalisation of market access - both for China and other countries: we also have to take steps to improve the rules which govern world trade. We have to keep the WTO relevant: it is no good plunging ahead with trade liberalisation on a global level if the global rules don't ensure that the notional market access generated by a tariff cut become effective on the ground.

In short, we have to keep the WTO relevant, and I am pleased to say that I have found the Chinese remarkably open to European ideas in the DDA, and I hope vice versa.

We have, in Geneva, and between capitals, started to develop a very close working relationship on all the key issues, and I think we have found many common interests. We are impressed by the quality of Chinese contributions to the debates in Geneva, by the level of commitment to the DDA not just in the WTO but also in regional forums such as the ASEM and APEC, and by the practical and businesslike solutions which China is putting forward, for the most part. Indeed, our common commitment to this was well put at the recent EU-China summit in Copenhagen, where both the EU and China stressed "their shared interest in strengthening the multilateral trading system".

So my message to you is that we are intensifying our work with the Chinese government, and we are both very keen to put together an ambitious result in the Round, a point reiterated to me only yesterday by Madame Wu Yi, and Minister Shi Guangsheng, in Beijing yesterday.

As to the detail, we are now assembling a major bilateral dialogue with China on the new Round, and a team of WTO experts will be flying out to Beijing next month to launch that process. We are particularly keen to work on a number of areas of interest, such as trade defence instruments and safeguards (where I think we can both agree that the rules need updating), technical barriers to trade, and agriculture. We also see good prospects for working together on the so-called new issues such as investment, public procurement, trade facilitation, and competition.

These are of course vital issues for both the EU and China. The way forward is to develop market access but underpinned by better multilateral rules in order to attract good quality investment, and to improve the quality of public administration. Progress in these areas means more stability and predictability for companies, lower costs of trade transactions, and better export performance. In terms of the current needs of the ailing world economy, it is not surprising that we are seeing the importance of these issues in the Doha Development Round rising up the political agenda.

But perhaps most of all, in the Doha Development Agenda, China has an early opportunity to pursue the ideas and principles that she has set out on the world stage. To be very frank, I think we need to recognise that the WTO negotiating process was rather a painful and difficult process for China, a seemingly never ending one-way street of demands on China for market access, changes in her domestic legislation and so on. But in the DDA, the traffic flows in two directions and China can herself seek to derive direct benefit from the negotiations.

And not just China will benefit from this two way flow, but the DDA talks as a whole will benefit. China is starting to emerge as a key player in the debate on global governance, a key pole in the economic system. China understands that we need a broad and ambitious outcome to the Doha negotiations, and an outcome covering both rules and market access.

Conclusion

Last year saw the launch of a new era for China and the WTO, a new era which sees China emerging rapidly as one of the key poles of the world economy. This year, as we get down to business, all the signs are that China remains very much on track both economically and politically to claiming her rightful place at the global economic top table.

The message I take from this year is that China is committed to delivering on the terms of her WTO accession package, and to playing a very full part in the Doha Development Agenda.

But in addition, close co-operation and collaboration between the EU and the Chinese authorities is going to be increasingly vital in terms of moving our trade relationship forward.

The fact is that - together - the EU and China can make an enormous contribution to keeping markets open, to keeping the WTO steaming ahead, to strengthening global economic governance, and to building sustainable development. And together - we can bridge the debate in the WTO between north and south.

After all, if the EU's trade policy, in stressing the importance of the development dimension, looks north and south, China, as a rapidly developing country, has one foot in the north and one in the south.

Thank you very much: I believe we still have time for your questions and comments, so please fire away.

