The EU has today launched a case at the World Trade Organization against the People's Republic of China, relating to its discriminatory trade practices against Lithuania, which are also hitting other exports from the EU Single Market.

Let me start by saying that EU engagement with China remains a fact. China is our major trading partner.

China is also a vital partner for EU global goals like climate action, which require a collective approach. We value this relationship, and we want to uphold and deepen it.

However, our relationship requires mutual respect. We should be able to talk about difficult issues. And work together on solving them. 

At the beginning of December, China put in place coercive measures against Lithuanian exports and against exports of EU products containing Lithuanian content. China is also cutting its exports to Lithuania.

We believe the practices applied in this case are in breach of WTO rules.

As I said, since 1 December 2021:

Chinese customs are banning Lithuanian imports from the Chinese market. The most affected sectors are: pharmaceuticals, lasers, electronics and food.

Chinese companies are cancelling orders from Lithuania.

China is also cutting its exports to Lithuania.

Moreover, China is encouraging multinational companies to abandon the use of Lithuanian components in their production, otherwise they may face import restrictions.

In fact, China's own customs statistics report a 91% drop in trade from Lithuania to China in December 2021 as compared to December 2020.

Let me be clear: These measures are a threat to the integrity of the EU Single Market. They affect intra-EU trade and EU supply chains. And they have a negative impact on EU industry.

This is why we are stepping forward to defend the EU's rights. Today we are bringing this case to the WTO.

Recently, China celebrated its 20th anniversary of joining the WTO. It agreed to be bound by multilateral rules and today we call on China to respect those rules, for the sake of the global trading system.

I would like to thank the teams who have worked day and night to build this case in record time.

While we pursue this action in the WTO dispute settlement system, in parallel, diplomatic contacts and efforts to deescalate the situation will continue.  

Also, the first stage of WTO consultations is explicitly intended to provide space for resolving a dispute. Only if this fails will WTO Members move to the next stage of requesting a panel.

More broadly, this situation has further underlined the need to equip ourselves with the right tools to respond when the EU and its Member States are the target of deliberate economic pressure.

This is why I urge EU Member States and the European Parliament to fast-track the work on the anti-coercion instrument, which we presented in December 2021.

It will give the EU the possibility to react swiftly and effectively when faced with economic coercion. 

The EU should invest every effort to have this instrument in place as soon as possible – and the Commission will support efforts by the French Presidency to make quick progress.