We are keen to intensify our cooperation on technology, covering areas as semiconductors, artificial intelligence, additive manufacturing, and quantum technology. This cooperation will be massively important for our economies and for our security in the future.

And the European Union followed the U.S. example and introduced its own investment screening mechanism in recent times, and we're eager to learn from the experiences of the United States in relation to export control and investment screening, to name but a few. So we can protect our trusted transatlantic trade and investment space, and we should have discussions on a possible agreement to white list each other when it comes to investment and export controls.

But we recognize these are only the first steps. We need to cooperate much more closely on the technologies that are transforming our economies in order to protect our trusted trading space. The EU agrees on the importance of telecom network security, particularly in relation to 5G. The European Commission, in fact, published an EU-wide risk assessment in October 2019 in respect of this area. And this month the EU and the member states will present a toolbox of mitigating measures to address these risks. This work will provide a good foundation for future transatlantic cooperation, an area of great concern to this administration.

If we don't solve this issue, China will help to grow its business in civil aviation at the expense of the European Union and the United States. Now is the time that we can defend the position of both the United States and the EU aircraft sectors in a market with strong emerging players. If we continue to beat each other up, then the future risks being lost to the new competitors.

Unfortunately, the current rulebook is out of date and the rules-based multilateral system has drifted away from economic and business realities. The gap in the multilateral rulebook has allowed China to provide significant subsidization that distorts markets and investment flows. By creating overcapacity in certain sectors, China's state-owned enterprises are in a position to outbid others in government procurement or in acquisitions. This means it can exploit its role as a key investment destination to siphon off technology by forcing giant ventures or requiring disclosure of trade secrets in order to get licenses. China has been able to do all of this while maintaining closed markets that allow its own operators to grow by putting up internal barriers to foreign operators such as complex licensing requirements and discriminatory licensing conditions.

That is why the WTO reform is a top European priority. We fully agree with the United States that the organization needs to be fixed and it needs a profound overhaul, not just tweaking at the margins. Rulemaking is paralyzed and transparency is underused, and the current rulebook does not adequately address some of the most trade-distorting measures such as industrial subsidies. And this week the United States, the European Union, and Japan came together in a joint statement to reflect this reality and our concern and our ability to work together. It's probably the first time that those three entities were in a photograph together for a while, and hopefully it's the start of something new.

But we have to step up our cooperation. And we need a new balance to be found in the WTO, with clear rules and commitments that properly regulate global trade. After all, it's an organization that's 25 years old. We need to establish a level playing field that reflects the world of today, a diverse global economy more connected and technologically driven than ever before. Our objective is to return the WTO to the center of global trade where it belongs.

That is why we urgently need to fix the negotiating function of the organization. And for this it is a total no-brainer because the organization has been unable to create new rules or adapt existing ones for far too long. Therefore, I warmly welcome what we did this week to try and deal with the issues of industrial subsidies and forced technology transfer together and to deal with the distorting trade – the distorting issues that are hampering the cooperation that's necessary and the rulebook on global trade. It shows what can be done if we work together.

Rights and obligations in the system should be rebalanced. And at a minimum, I think we can probably agree that the so-called emerging countries, like China, have emerged. This means that a fresh look is needed at the question of exceptions for developing countries, which should only be available where and when needed. A broad exception for two-thirds of WTO members is not acceptable. So we are in agreement with the United States on this and we need to define the appropriate way to get there.

The WTO will need to change the way it works, negotiates, and decides. The hostage-taking and consensus-blocking attitude will not work anymore, and we need mechanisms to facilitate the integration of plurilateral approaches in the WTO framework. This would introduce a new dynamic into the organization and be crucial for several negotiations that are important in the future, such as e-commerce.

But I repeat, what will be the value of new rules without a proper enforcement mechanism? We therefore need an effective dispute-settlement system that enforces the rules as we have agreed them. Nobody can play the global game in trade without a good referee.

To our American friends, my message is very simple: Let's talk. Let's cooperate. Let's lead. We would approach any discussions on WTO reform with an open mind. And we have made proposals to address these concerns of the United States recently, and we now need clarity in relation to what the United States actually wants. The time has come to start discussions in earnest, and our strong preference is to tackle WTO reform on the basis of transatlantic cooperation. But if the United States does not wish to engage in this work, the European Union will have to strike out on its own with other partners.