Energy issues in the European Union and the importance of promoting China-EU energy cooperation

EU-China Energy Conference on EU-China Energy relations
Brussels, 25 May 2004

Vice Minister, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is a pleasure to be here today at the 5th EU- China Energy Conference. Allow me to start by quoting an old Chinese proverb: “Sail when there is a favourable wind.” I think there has never been a period where there was a more favourable wind in the relations between the People's Republic of China and the European Union. The recent visit to Europe of the Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao is the best proof of the excellent partnership that China and the EU have established over the last few years.

The intensified cooperation has also been crowned by success in my area of responsibility. In October 2003, a strategic partnership with China was inaugurated by the signing of the Galileo Cooperation Agreement. The fact that China was the very first third country, with which such an agreement was concluded, is a clear demonstration of the importance that we attach to cooperation with China. Another milestone in the bilateral transport relations was the conclusion of a comprehensive EU-China Maritime Agreement in 2003. A first exchange of views has also recently taken place in the sector of aviation, with a view to a further intensification of the bilateral relations.

The state of play of cooperation and the possibilities of a further deepening of our relations in the other sector under my responsibility, the area of energy, is the subject of this Conference, during which representatives of the European and Chinese industry will discuss together with high-ranking officials from the EU and China. As an event jointly organised by the Commission's Directorate General for Energy and Transport and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology, I believe that it is an appropriate forum to address issues of common concern for both the EU and China in the field of energy.

1. EU-China energy relations

When discussing our relationship, it is difficult not to talk about China's overall economic progress, which has been doubtlessly one of the most important conditioning factors. Today China's total GDP is already the 6th largest in the world, and China's economy in terms of purchasing power ranks already second in the world. The fast growing Chinese economy combined with a continuing population growth is expected to lead to a proportionally rapid growth in domestic demand for energy products, particularly oil. I will come back to this later on.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Our partnership is certainly not a new one. The EU and China have been co-operating in the field of energy for two decades.

In addition, since 1994, policy dialogue has taken place in the context of the Conference on EU-China Energy Co-operation gathering together high-level European and Chinese representatives from industry and the administration every two years. The previous Conference, which I also had the pleasure to attend, took place in June 2001 in Beijing. I am convinced that this, the 5th Conference, will be equally successful.

Both China and the EU face similar problems, notably the security of energy supply for the next decades and sustainable energy development. The development of environmentally friendly technologies in the coal sector is another important issue, which needs to be tackled in the near future. We have already considerable experience in the use of renewable energies, which we would like to share with you.

The EU is prepared to support you in meeting the abovementioned challenges and to mutually exchange our experiences. I suggest that our future cooperation should also include discussions on the areas of gas and oil and on energy forecasts in general. As regards nuclear energy, we would be pleased if the proposed agreement on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy could be concluded this year.

This Conference aspires to be yet another step towards the intensification of relations in the energy field. I am confident that the participation of representatives from the European and Chinese energy sectors will ensure a fruitful discussion on all the abovementioned topics of common interest and will contribute in overcoming the occurring obstacles.

Allow me now to enter into a little more detail as regards the specific topics the Conference is going to cover:

2. Energy Policy and Security of Supply

Security of energy supply is the cornerstone of our energy policy. There are two aspects to this. First, there is a growing demand for energy products not only in Europe but also world-wide and - not least - in China. Second, our economies are increasingly dependent on supplies from external resources. For instance, the EU is the largest net energy-importing region in the world and EU energy dependence is expected to grow from 50% at present to 70% in 2030 unless decisive action is taken.

Taking into account this reality, the European Union has developed a new approach to energy policy, which recognises the clear link between energy supply and energy demand. This approach puts, for the first time, energy demand management at the forefront of energy policy. It emphasises diversification in energy supply, including the promotion of renewables and a fresh look at the nuclear option. It also stresses the importance of a permanent dialogue between energy Producers and Consumers.

In the coming years our economies will be increasingly dependent on oil. Fluctuations in oil prices can have a distorting and destabilising effect on the economies of both producers and consumers. The lack of certainty on security of supply and the opacity of the markets, which give rise to speculation, are the two factors that account for high price levels. This situation works mainly to the detriment of energy importers. Given that energy markets are globalised, energy importers find themselves in a situation where they have to compete for limited energy supplies on world markets, thus, creating tension among them. This is a potentially risky situation, which requires strategic management.

According to the Green Paper, more than 70% of the world's oil reserves are located in the member countries of OPEC. Both the EU and China will become increasingly dependent on the Middle East. If no specific measures are taken to disengage the oil sector, especially in transport, the EU's oil dependence could reach 90% by the year 2020. In 2003, China became the second biggest importer of oil. The rise in the Chinese demand for oil was seriously underestimated as it reached the levels that according to forecasts China was expected to reach by the year 2010.

Consequently, it is obvious that the EU and China to a large extent share the same concerns on future oil supply. Therefore, closer and more transparent relations between us are indispensable.

We have also to work together so that a permanent and efficient Producer-Consumer dialogue be in place. This has been one of the priorities of the Commission but we must recognise that so far this dialogue has not achieved concrete results. That is why the Commission has developed a set of bilateral dialogues with key producing countries such as Russia, Algeria or Iran.

In addition to the development of an efficient Producer-Consumer Dialogue, we need to take measures in order to manage our energy dependence. As I said, we in the EU believe that our efforts should be focused notably on energy demand and diversification of energy sources. The Commission is ready to give high priority on co-operation in these fields.

Measures to decouple global oil demand from growth will also have clear benefits. Fuel efficiency throughout the transport system will save us time and reduce pressure on the oil market. Alternative fuels (bio-fuels, natural gas, and hydrogen) will have to be introduced during the coming 10-20 years. In this context, I welcome the idea of holding an international conference on the use of hydrogen that takes place on this very day in Beijing.

3. The evolution of energy markets

Europe has been developing a model of energy markets based on regulated competition. While security of supply and public service are key underlying concerns, competition will lead to greater efficiency and benefits to consumers.

The enlarged EU with 25 Member States encompasses a population of some 450 million and has thus become the world's largest single energy market. The energy industry is a huge part of the European economy, with a turnover of € 250 billion per year. It is a vital component of industrial competitiveness. Our objective is to create a market, which functions effectively in the long term, including not just the current now 25 Member States but also European Union's close neighbours, notably Russia.

I know that you are very interested in our experience of opening our energy market in Europe. Let me say a few words about where we stand in this field.

The EU agreed in the summer of 2003 a package of legislation to complete the creation of its energy internal market. Major changes in the organisation of electricity and gas markets have already been made. In the next few years we will see the completion of a process, by which the industry will pass from a situation where monopolistic suppliers served closed national and regional markets to the creation of an operational internal market. A market is operational if there is competition at the level of both production of electricity and gas, and downstream. In this new market consumers will be able to choose their supplier from a range of companies active in the EU market.

In July 2004, all commercial customers will be able to choose freely their suppliers throughout the Union. In July 2007, all consumers including households will have this right; the market will then be fully open to competition. Two thirds of the market for electricity and 80% of that for gas are today open to competition on a European scale. For both gas and electricity, customers are clearly beginning to use their new rights to shop around for new suppliers and put former monopolies under competitive pressures.

These developments will bring further important benefits for consumers, which will benefit from competitive energy prices. But also on the supply side, there will be new opportunities for investors wanting to enter the newly created competitive market.

4. Sustainable energies, energy efficiency and demand management

Let me turn now to the issue of energy and the environment. One important issue here, which we would like to address in this Conference, is the development of environmentally friendly technologies in the coal sector.

The future of coal depends largely on the development of techniques to reduce the environmental impact of the use of coal. Cleaner combustion technologies and CO2 sequestration are important aspects to be taken into consideration. China is the world's largest producer and consumer of coal. Coal covers some 70% of China's primary energy needs and represents nearly 90% of the fuel used in the electricity sector. This is therefore a key area for further deepening our co-operation. I see this Conference as a great opportunity to discuss the transfer of know-how on the use of clean coal technologies.

I have already mentioned the importance of energy efficiency when it comes to security of supply. However, energy efficiency also plays a key role in our policies to reduce the environmental impact of the energy sector. The EU has recently adopted key measures in this field, namely the directive on promotion of cogeneration and the directive on energy performance of buildings. When fully implemented, these directives should make another valid contribution to further exploiting the energy saving potential, which exists in these sectors.

The use of renewable energy has increased considerably in the EU in the last few years. New legislation has been put in place, for example on bio fuels, and Member States and the EU have set clear targets to be achieved in this important area. Both energy efficiency and renewable energy are key aspects of our policies to combat climate change and to meet Kyoto commitments.

We cannot claim victory yet, but much progress has been made. However, better regulation will not produce results unless it meets with a positive response from operators, therefore the legislation must be backed up by wide dissemination of the best examples of technological development.

Energy efficiency and renewable energy should also feature prominently in our co-operation with China. Much has already been achieved. The first example of this is a € 20 million energy/environment co-operation programme, initiated and discussed in the working group on energy, and adopted by the Commission in December 2001. The objective of this programme is to ensure a sustainable use of energy through the improvement of energy efficiency, the development of renewable energies and the increased use of natural gas.

Moreover, a training programme on the use of the Kyoto Protocol's flexibility mechanisms was launched in early 2003, and a training programme on the development of renewable energies in the context of the Kyoto Protocol was started at the end of 2003. Last but not least, the efforts to increase China's participation in the 5th EU Research Framework Programme have led to some success; 18 projects have started, out of which more than 50% deal with energy-related subjects.

Conclusion

Ladies and Gentlemen,

There is no doubt that energy must be at the forefront of co-operation between China and the EU and play a key role in establishing a strategic partnership. For this, we need your contribution and through your cooperation I am confident that this relationship will render considerable benefits to both sides. We both face common challenges: security of energy supply, open markets and climate change. We have to work together, and we look very much forward in doing so. Let this event mark a milestone in this process.

Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen, for your attention.

