This Commission is now seven months in office and so much has changed in that intervening period.

In just a couple of months, we've experienced the onset on a geopolitical winter, marked by greater power competition.

On the climate front, the landscape has also changed:

The US pulling out of the Paris Agreement.

Here in Europe, people worrying about the impact of climate policies on their finances and way of life.

And immediate pressures like cost of living and security threats garnering more public attention.

All of which makes climate politics more complicated than it was, even just one year ago.

But it will continue to be as relevant as before.

 

(Security and economic implications of climate change)

Contrary to what some want you to believe, climate action is not a bleeding heart ideological activist hobby.

It's not about saving the planet.

The planet has been there for 4-5 billion years.

And will probably withstand another 4-5 billion more. 

But our ecosystems – our economies, our societies, our way of life – won't do the same.

If anything, climate action is about our jobs in a competitive, circular economy moving into clean tech.

It's about our health in a liveable, breathable planet.

It's about our security, be it energy security or the risks of conflicts over critical raw materials, migration, or water.

Bottom line – climate action has moved front and centre into an economic and security reality with huge bearing on geopolitics.

We see this playing out around the world.

Look up North.

The melting of Arctic ice is giving Russia direct access to both oceans. Something that was inconceivable a couple of years ago.

As a result, it has already begun relocating its fleet and nuclear arsenal to the far North.

This is a massive strategic game changer in terms of security.

Look East.

Tensions over water resources in Kashmir have contributed to the outbreak of hostilities between India and Pakistan.

Look down South.

In Somalia, drought has brought only two rainy seasons in five years.

This is crippling agriculture and livestock sectors, threatening to displace millions of people.

And in the Sahel, rogue powers, such as Wagner, are exploiting fragile societies and bringing conflict.

Europe is not isolated nor inoculated against these risks.

A problem in Africa, the Middle East or Asia, can easily become a problem for Europe too. Think about migration which is a big concern for our citizens.

In addition, we are also experiencing the convergence of climate and security risks of our own.

Just last week, I was in Greece where they are on high alert for the impending wildfire season.

This is a phenomenon happening across much of Southern Europe, causing strain on military and civilian resources and capacity.

We're seeing similar patterns with floods, which are striking with increasing intensity across Europe.

They pose a direct threat to vital infrastructure, including ports, coastal installations, and military airfields.

They also put pressure on our democratic systems.

What's happening in Europe is arguably less existential than what we're seeing internationally right now.

But they are profoundly destabilising for our continent, nonetheless.

Climate-related stressors exacerbate existing economic and social vulnerabilities.

Consider the figures:

The cost of inaction is staggering.

The price tag for damages from a 2°C increase will cost six times more than measures to mitigate its effects.

We're already feeling the strain.

If you look at Europe, the cost of climate change has gone up around 400% in the last couple of decades. 

We are now easily at 5200 billion in terms of damages per year. And make no mistake, that number only goes up. 

This is a huge cost to our economy. And unfortunately that will get worse. 

Especially at a time when Europe must prioritise investments that will secure our future, such as defence, innovation and the digital transformation.

 

(Solutions)

Ladies and Gentlemen,

There are no short cuts, silver bullets, or quick fixes to the climate crisis.

But the answer is straightforward:

The clean transition must continue at full speed.

That means first investing in a decarbonised, circular, and competitive economy.

Clean tech is a fast growing, very promising and sexy sector.

Not only can we make the EU a clean superpower.

We can also secure our energy freedom, so we never ever at the receiving end of rogue states like Russia.

Doubling down on renewables, grid capacity, nuclear and interconnectors will make a huge difference on climate, security and independence.

It also means, second, adapting better to protect our people against the impacts of climate change that are already here.

Given the damage done, adaptation is a reality.

At the end of next year, we will be rolling out a European Climate Adaptation Plan to ensure adapting to extreme weather events is at the heart of everything we do.

Third, it means greater attention in our external policies on the nexus between climate change, environmental degradation, peace, security and defence.

Because if we don't, we'll be flying blind.

And fourth, it means the biggest players stepping up with strong leadership to bolster global cooperation and multilateralism.

I'm the first to acknowledge that this is hugely complex.

To those who complain about ‘Paris' and the turgid multilateral system I say very clearly:

Paris works!

It's not perfect. It's by far the best we have.

Since 2015, the world has been able to push the needle back from a 4-degree Celsius world to a 2.7-degree one.

I am the first to say that we have to move faster.

But we are turning the tide.

The EU will continue to be a global trailblazer and play its part.

We will deliver an ambitious Nationally Determined Contribution before we walk into Bélem.

But we – as many others – need to see all major emitters contribute their fair share.

Take China for example.

Its approach to climate action is a mixed bag.

On the one hand, they're doing an amazing job in electrification and renewable energy investment like solar, wind and EVs.

That is truly impressive.

If you have been in Beijing 10, 15 years ago and you are back today, you will be amazed by the transition. 

At the same time there is a significant issue with heavily state-subsidised goods out of China flooding the EU marketplace. And basically killing the European companies.

Competition is great. Unfair competition is something we should not allow.

That's part of the conversation we need to have with the Chinese.

China continues building new coal fired power plants at home and abroad. 

The narrative is that these coal-plants are back-up capacity.

My question to the Chinese interlocutor is: Really? Is it conceivable that you first build these plants in rural areas, that you then equip people and that you then treat these plants as a museum. That is highly unlikely. 

Coal is a dramatic problem for climate. 

And particularly in a country with the leadership potential of China and responsible for 30% of emissions worldwide takes this course, this is something we need to discuss.

This is at the heart of our diplomatic efforts.  

The US comes to mind of course.

The Federal government may have withdrawn from Paris.

That is deeply unfortunately.

Let's be clear. It's a major blow to climate diplomacy.

Why? Because it is the world's most formidable geopolitical power. It is the largest economy in the world. It is the second largest emitter. 

Hugely problematic. 

At the same time, if you look at what a good number of States, cities, and even businesses are doing, they continue to pursue a climate agenda even if they're using different wording.

Because it makes economic sense to do so! If there is an opportunity in clean tech, in electrification, they would just pursue it. 

Let me add one more important thing. 

Not only have we driven down our own emissions as Europeans - we are not at 6% of global emissions, we are also by far the largest contributor to climate action globally. 

We are talking about roughly 30 billion out of 100 billion. 

We are doing way more than our fair share. 

The EU is true to its word: it is and will remain the biggest global donor.

And we will continue that leadership. 

But if you want to make sure that you tackle the whole equation, you cannot only do the 6%, you need the rest of the family to tackle the 94%. 

That is why more leadership from all major emitters is absolutely needed. 

 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, 

Too often the debate around climate change is politicised, pitting right against left in what feels like identity politics.

I don't do ideology.

I think we should look at the numbers.

Climate change is grounded in decades of rigorous scientific research.

Ignoring, denying or even suppressing facts or science has nothing to do with ‘scepticism'.

In fact, rejecting science reflects ideology.

While the planet itself will sustain even more extreme weather events, the ecosystem we live in will not.

Climate change threatens our economies, our way of life, and our security.

No matter where we live or what we believe, we are all affected.

So let's keep climate action high on the agenda.

Let's make sure we do way more in the domain of mitigation. 

Let's make sure we do way more in the domain of adaptation.

And be way more assertive in the domain of diplomacy. 

Making sure we embark in collaboration, using carrots and using sticks with all the others across the globe. 

Thank you very much. 

