Introduction

Thank you very much Serge Janssens de Varebeke and good to be back here, just four months after my last visit. Once again, let me take the opportunity to thank you for all your efforts, and for the remarkable way in which the Chamber and the European Commission are working together, not just in the twenty Working Groups, but across the board in EU-China trade relations.

Before I begin my substantive remarks, a few words about what I have been doing during another rewarding, but again fairly brief visit. Yesterday, I co-chaired the EU-China Joint Committee with Vice Minister Lei in the regrettable absence through illness of Minister Lu, and together with Romano Prodi, paid a call on President Hu before we took part in the EU-China summit chaired on the Chinese side by Wen Jiabao. We signed plenty of agreements, including two new dialogues (on intellectual property and industrial policy both I should think of interest to the Chamber) and the important ADS agreement which will be beneficial to the tourist industry, and of course the Galileo agreement. As a night-cap, I took part in the evening in my first ever Internet Chat in China at the People's Daily, which was a great experience, and is emblematic of the extraordinary pace of change in China. Thence to the airport for a 12 hour flight to New York, ahead of the New York marathon, which takes place on Sunday. In fact I think it is a pretty good excuse which I shall of course use to explain why I did not run 2hrs 30 minutes.

EU-China bilateral trade relations

I think it is useful that the Chamber has chosen this provocative title for my talk today because sometimes it is important to pose fundamental questions. For all those who thought Chinese trade relations with the rest of the world would become less an issue of interest and controversy, the current surge of interest, notably in Washington, must come as a real surprise. But: plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose…perhaps the most startling thing about our current trading relationship with China is that it has been marked, during my four years as Trade Commissioner, by extraordinary change, but it is also hard to avoid the conclusion that the fundamental positives and negatives, the underlying assumptions, the questions, remain broadly the same.

So: are we making real strides in our trade relationship with China ? Or are we stumbling backwards ? In my remarks today, I would like to begin with the issues which are perhaps of most interest to you - i.e., addressing EU-China trade disputes. But I also want to give you some insight into how we are addressing our differences on multilateral trade policy questions with China in the WTO.

If we are to talk about change, let us begin in an obvious place. It is interesting to recall that in 1999, the total size of China's trade with the rest of the world was no greater than that of the Netherlands. Four years on, China is well on the way to becoming our second largest trade partner: our second largest source of imports [and of course closing fast on the US]; and our fifth largest export outlet. Total trade is now worth €115 billion, and is growing faster than the rocket China recently despatched into orbit - at around 17% a year. But of course it is impossible to ignore the fact that our trade deficit is now an amazing 40% of the size of total trade, and this too is growing at a rather healthy rate.

Indeed, has the EU trade deficit now become a political problem, as it evidently has in the US ? In my view, not yet. Why ? First, because the EU has perhaps less of a mercantilist vision which demands at least a balance of trade, and preferably a positive balance, with each of its partners. Secondly, however, the EU has an overall balance of trade, more or less: obviously a deficit with China, but a surplus elsewhere. Thirdly, there is quite a degree of understanding as to the unique circumstances behind China's extraordinary competitive position at the moment. For example, the advantage coming from the annual graduation of more than 550,000 engineers cannot be overlooked. The combination of very high levels of foreign investment, cheap but well-trained labour, and a middle class which while growing fast is not yet sucking in the same level of imports as developed economies is hard to overstate. Finally, because - unlike in the US - there is a much lesser sense of geopolitical challenge to Europe from China. Partly that is because Europe is not yet a political superpower herself. But partly it is because we are happy to see a future in which at the same time as we safeguard a strong transatlantic alliance, we see a greater diffusion of power, a more multi-polar world, developing.

So the EU is relatively immune to the kind of rather difficult politics in the US at the moment on this topic. But I say only "relatively". Clear that there is more pressure mounting on this front, particularly in certain member states, and we should not be too nonchalant about that.

But descending from these lofty geopolitical heights, at which we can look with relative equanimity at the amazing advance of the Chinese economy, particularly the exporting part of it, let me just add that it would be good if Chinese policy makers were to at least acknowledge the trade deficit in the sense of recognising the great openness of the European economy, and the absence of structural barriers to trade. To hear complaints of damaging discrimination against Chinese firms (for example in trade defence) at the same time as the trade gap is widening by 15% a year in the other direction is stretching the bounds of credulity, to be honest. And doubly so when the complaints are often cast in rather Chinese nationalistic terms, which is unfortunate as it makes it harder to find solutions to the problems.

And returning to our themes of continuity and change, there seems to be one constant in our enormous and rapidly growing trade and investment relationship with China: trade problems. We are not surprised or shocked by this, given the pace of change in the relationship as a whole. Our equanimity in the face of the Chinese deficit does not mean that we are in any way indifferent to problems EU companies have in trading with and investing in China. Our record shows that we are ready to address each and every issue, point by point, with the Chinese authorities. Here, I am particularly grateful both to the Chamber and to our own Delegation here in Beijing for the excellent role they play in bringing problems rapidly to our attention. Indeed, many of the issues raised by the Chamber in your recent Position Papers which we have received and digested back in Brussels have now been identified formally as priority issues. These we will now take up in a very direct but constructive way with the authorities here in Beijing, and indeed many of the topics have come up in the last day or so while we have been here.

Let me say a word or two about each type of problems in turn, starting with the problems where we are most able to move forward, coming down to the hardest.

The most obvious area stems specifically from WTO implementation problems, but we are of course more than ready to take up issues which go beyond Chinese WTO commitments, for example relating to the speed or scope of Chinese liberalisation. In the latter case, where the Commission cannot point to a specific legal commitment that the Chinese have to follow, it is doubly important that we work very closely with you in the private sector, not least because you are often in the best position to convince the Chinese that what we are asking for is often in their own best interests.

So we will continue to state, firmly but fairly, the problems to the Chinese authorities, and to demand results. The results of this pressure have not been negligible, even during the short four months since my last visit to Beijing. Just as one or two examples:

in insurance, we are very pleased that some of the frankly excessive capital requirements for the opening of branches will be reduced, and we are currently looking at the substance of the new measures. But problems remain in this sector, such as the waiting period for a foreign company to be licensed in a second city, and we will continue to insist on full compliance with WTO commitments. And excessive capital requirements remain a problem in the financial services sector as a whole.
in construction, we are generally pleased that foreign contractors who have the necessary qualification certificates can now apply for extension of this status, but we are still waiting for the phasing out of residence requirements for engineers and architects.
on car financing, we were very pleased to see the long overdue opening in this area, where the Chinese were far behind schedule in implementing their WTO commitments, But I understand from EU players in the market that we are still not where we expected to be and I therefore encourage the Chamber to follow developments in this sector closely. I am also very concerned that the Chinese appear to be going ahead with their idea of separate distribution channels in the car sector. This will be a major problem.
and in the difficult area of sanitary and phytosanitary issues, we are pleased, since the announcement of the lifting of the ban on Dutch products when I was last in Beijing, that China has now recognised the United Kingdom as free of the disease of "foot and mouth". But more generally in this area, we remain very keen that China should implement international standards for example in the import of cosmetics and wood packaging.
All that is on the positive side of the ledger. But we still have some very serious concerns, for example in the following areas:

there are still problems in the way in which China manages quotas and tariff rate quotas, particularly for cars and fertilisers.
enforcement of intellectual property rights remains a big problem, particularly in the ambiguous criminal liability standards, the high thresholds required to prosecute IPR infringements, and the lack of enforcement at a local level.
telecoms remains a problem, and the old problem of restrictions on the choice of a joint venture partner, which are not just contrary to WTO commitments undertaken by China, but which formally breach national treatment. And we have made clear to the Chinese authorities that we will insist that the granting of licences, notably in the area of 3G mobile is made in a transparent, objective and discriminatory manner.
A lot of progress, by the way, can be made at the government to government level by establishing regulatory dialogues, which enable us to address many of the non-tariff barriers which reduce the actual benefits of liberalisation. For example, the Regulatory Dialogue, the Industrial Policy Dialogue, and of course the Information Society Dialogue are all good examples of this. And we are more than ready to also raise, in a government to government context, broader issues with a trade policy dimension, such as the Working Group on energy.

Of course, all this work is very resource intensive for you in the private sector, as well as for the Commission, the Member States and the Chinese authorities themselves. But I cannot stress enough that we on the government side cannot do it without you. Your behind the scenes pressure is not just invaluable, it is essential. And you must continue your efforts to exercise it outside Beijing, given that implementation is most often a local question, as I have observed in visits to Shanghai and Guangdong.

For our part, apart from insisting on a very regular basis on all trade problems with the Chinese side directly, what are we doing? First, it is not our style to wave a big stick, but to help the Chinese financially with the improvements we are seeking. As I have told you before, we are spending 22 million euros at the moment on programmes to assist the Chinese on implementation, and this will be increased to €37 million from next year. Second, we are maintaining the pressure in Geneva, and particularly with the Transition Review Mechanism, for which the second annual programme is just getting under way. We continue to take this very seriously, and intend to follow up some of the answers given to us by the Chinese authorities last year, which did not always go as far as we would like.

EU and China in the context of the Doha Development Agenda

Talking of Geneva brings me nicely to the latest situation in the WTO Round of multilateral trade negotiations. When I was here in June, hope still sprang eternal for the Fifth WTO Ministerial meeting in Cancun in September. But the hope has long since sprang out of Cancun. We all know what happened there, and the result is a major set-back for the Doha Development Agenda. I will not dwell on the implications here, but it is clear that is now that any one ready to put a lot of money on conclusion of the Round by the agreed timeframe of the end of 2004 may have more money than sense.

All WTO Members stand to lose. But if I may, I think that China is one of the principal losers who stood to gain much from a positive outcome, including most obviously in market access. In other words, we do not regard China's membership of the G20 as some expression of indifference to the multilateral trading system, as some declaration of war on the part of the south against the north. China has far too great a stake in a successful outcome of the DDA for that, and I was delighted to have confirmation of that at the highest level from this visit. Indeed, when it comes to what China has to gain, just consider it is clear that China is in the enviable position of having everything to gain, and nothing to lose. For example, consider the fact that with an average tariff of 11% on textiles and clothing, China can only gain if the Round succeeds, and if there is thereby a substantial reduction in the average tariff of 29% that India puts on the same products, or in the 35% figure which applies for Brazil. And many of you will also know that this simple assessment doesn't even touch on peak tariffs in textiles, which makes the case even stronger.

So where next ? For our part, the EU has made it clear that it would be a mistake to pretend that we can simply pick ourselves up, brush ourselves down, and to claim that we can move forward with business as usual as if nothing had happened in the interim. Cancun was a major failure. So we are in reflection and consultation mode within the EU - we are reflecting inside the Commission, with the Member States, the Parliament, and with all our major constituencies inside the EU, including of course business. In this consultation, we are asking rather fundamental questions, including the fundamental one of whether we in the European Union maintain our traditional preference for the multilateral system.

Here, I am happy to announce that early results of our consultation - with no lesser a body than the European Council, and similar echoes from the European Parliament - conclude that we not only reconfirm our multilateral approach, but we are open to an early resumption of the DDA negotiations. The key phrase, however, is perhaps the stress on the commitment by all WTO members to make progress in the DDA. As the European Council said, this will be indispensable to any successful resumption of the negotiations. So a major part of my visit to China this week, and of course a major part of my visit to New York and Washington next week, is to see what scope there is, what appetite there is, for an early re-launch, beyond the usual diplomatic formulas that we read every day on the news wires.

Although China is clearly keeping a boot in both bilateral and multilateral camps, I have had very strong confirmation that China wants to maintain a very good level of multilateral co-operation. Indeed I am very pleased to announce that we will shortly launch a new high level dialogue on trade and WTO issues between the Vice Minister of MOFCOM and our own Director General for Trade, Peter Carl. We are very keen that China retains her current position at the centre of WTO gravity, a constructive and reliable partner who does not go hunting for support amongst the extremes.

So in conclusion, as I leave China, I retain a fundamental sense of optimism as to China's determination to build both a strong relationship with the EU, and a strong multilateral system. Whatever view we take of the future development of the world economy and indeed international relations, there are very few models which suggest that EU - China relations will not be pivotal to the century which we have still only just begun. I strongly believe that trade will be one of the key elements of that, and I feel sure that we will look back at this period as a vital moment in securing the long term future of the EU-China relationship.

