This afternoon I want to talk about globalisation. After ten months in my job as European Trade Commissioner, I think I have an original perspective to offer. A perspective shaped by visions of pullovers and trousers.

You would never know it, on the basis of reading the European press, but the European Union remains the second largest exporter of textiles in the world. This surprising fact contradicts the view of those who see globalisation, and the rise of China and India in particular, as the swamping of European markets by low cost producers. The truth is Europe can compete in the new world, but it involves a process of restructuring and adjustment in which there will inevitably be losers as well as winners within the EU itself. But it was always thus, given that economic dynamism, technological change and human creativity are the source of Europe's high levels of prosperity.

The losers command legitimate sympathy. Of course textile manufacturers in Europe knew ten years ago that the Multi Fibre Agreement, and the global system of textile quotas it enshrined, would come to a final end at the start of 2005. But, such has been the remarkable speed of China's development that no-one could have anticipated the industrial might and muscle – and export capacity - that China has attained today.

Inevitably, feelings are running high in Europe, and understandably so, over the impact of globalisation on jobs, companies, families and communities.

I have been described by some as an excessive economic liberal – too slow to intervene to manage the impact of China's surging export power, and so damaging Europe's producers.

By others I have been pilloried for seeking to manage a market phenomenon whose dimensions none of us can yet fully appreciate, so damaging Europe's importers and consumers.

I want to make my position clear. I am for open trade. I am for liberalisation. In textiles I welcome the end of the multi fibre agreement. I want China to benefit from WTO membership; and the rest of the world to benefit from China's entry into international markets and opening of her own home market.

Of course, where trading practices contravene WTO rules we will robustly defend our interests. But I am not, as a matter of basic conviction, in favour of intervention in markets or managing trade. In the long run this is a cul de sac. It inhibits innovation and adjustment. It entrenches uncompetitiveness. In the short term, it can bring desirable relief; but as we have seen, it can also have unforeseen and damaging consequences in a world where trade is flowing as fast and furious as today.

But I operate in the sphere of practical politics not pure economic theory. I have to recognise and manage public pressures, and try to reconcile them when they clash. We all know that the textiles issue is particularly sensitive. I had no choice last June but to find some temporary relief for European producers who, for whatever reason, were against the wall. I refused to do this unilaterally, or without sound evidence, because I do not believe that is the way to respond to China. I will continue to resist unilateral action so long as China, too, maintains the spirit of dialogue and cooperation.

Let's use what happened this summer to have a much clearer, better informed debate about globalisation; the impact of China and India, and how we should respond. Political leaders in Europe have to be more creative and courageous.

We must resolve differences and come to a common view, rather than asking the Commission to try (inevitably without complete success) to reconcile irreconcilable demands. The Commission for its part has a vital responsibility in stimulating this debate.

This is a matter of real urgency. I continue to believe that, in the particular circumstances we face, the Shanghai textiles agreement is a good one for Europe and should be maintained. But I will continue to take a lot of persuading to manage trade in similar ways, unless, in doing so, we are genuinely creating the space for businesses and people to adapt to new circumstances in the long term. This is the only way forward.

So let the globalisation debate go on.

First of all, let's try to define it. Due to unprecedented progress in transport technology and communication, globalisation is bringing about a fantastic acceleration of exchanges between the nations of the world. Exchanges of people, knowledge, culture for the best - exchanges of pollution, dirty money or diseases for the worst. Also, what concerns me most as EU trade commissioner, exchanges of goods and services on a huge and growing scale. The processes of globalisation are indeed a major step in the history of the world's economy, a moment that will change forever the face of the planet, as important as the invention of currency by the ancient Greeks more than 25 centuries ago, as the creation of a banking system in Europe in the Middle-Ages or as the Industrial Revolution which started in Great Britain in the mid eighteenth century.

What is new compared to these major developments of the market economy is its extent: globalisation indeed concerns every human being on the planet, in every aspect of his or her life. No surprise then if globalisation is attacked and designated as the cause of all problems we face, especially in the Western world.

As you know, the growth of manufacturing in China and, for example, the service sector in India are changing global economic relations very fast. Low cost IT links and increasingly well-educated populations in Asia are producing new global production and employment patterns, with huge consequences for energy demand and raw materials. These trends have accelerated in the last two years.

The geopolitical consequences of these two nations are still profound. Between them they account for nearly two fifths of the world's economic population, five times that of EU. A third of world growth since the year 2000 has come from China. China's foreign exchange reserves are seventeen times bigger than the UK's, for example. India graduates three times the number of engineers as the United States. Of China's three million graduates each year, 250,000 are engineers.

Within fifteen years China will consume more than Saudi Arabia's current entire oil production. In ten years the car industry expects 160 million cars on the road in China. China already consumes around a third of world steel, and its own production of steel increases each year by the equivalent of half the total Japanese steel output.

These facts are remarkable. But our role as officials and political leaders is to show that we manage these shifts in everyone's interest so that globalisation brings in many more advantages than drawbacks and to demonstrate how it can be even more efficient if responsibly managed.

If we get it right, globalisation will mean a higher standard of living, higher rates of literacy and longer life expectancy for hundreds and hundreds of millions of people.

How it happened is a fundamental question. The continuous flow of technical innovations we encountered in the past two generations and scientific progress coming from all around the world are the decisive elements which led to a genuine revolution in the fields of communication and transport. As communications are easier and transport of goods and people cheaper, goods can be made where they are most efficiently produced and people can work where they are the most proficient. Capital and labour costs are reduced, prices are decreasing. The economic process is easy to understand but its consequences are more complex to deal with.

Cheaper products first mean higher purchasing power for all of us: access to basic goods for millions of poor in developing countries and cheaper basic goods that benefit poor families in rich countries as well.

Globally it means more jobs. For companies, European companies included, it means bigger markets, higher profits and fresh opportunities if they seize them. The recent price rise of oil and other raw materials are often presented as a consequence of the growing Chinese demand, which is partially true and is a real problem, but it is not often stressed that this trend is counterbalanced by lower costs of production here in China. Contrary to what happened in the 1970s, oil prices have picked up but inflation rates stay low which is also a positive aspect of a globalised economy.

I also want to point out what is, in my mind, the major geopolitical change brought by globalisation. Worldwide trade, foreign direct investment and cross-border supply chains not only have an impact on our economies but are also profoundly transforming the relations between our nations. With more and more integrated economies, we are also politically more dependent on each other. Let's never forget, that when nations are trading, they are not making war on each other. And within countries, these impacts make our societies more open, more diverse and I believe more pluralistic, creative and free, as you will find in China. I want to believe that what happened with European integration over the last 50 years, which has given us an unprecedented period of peace, will also happen on other continents, and between them.

But I said that the issue of globalisation is complex and far from smooth.

Whereas here, in Asia, globalisation is first seen as a process which generates jobs and lifts millions out of dire poverty, in Europe, it is often pointed at with an accusing finger as a destructive force.

I hold to my view that the wrong answer would be to build new tariff barriers and to protect us behind unrealistic walls.

Europe has to develop a much more sophisticated response to the challenge of globalisation. Let me suggest four principles for action:

First, Europe has to attract talent from all over the world.

A domestic focus on producing high-quality maths and science graduates needs to be complemented by encouraging the most talented young researchers from India, China and elsewhere in Asia to study and work in Europe. Unexpectedly, US visa restrictions since 9/11 have offered our universities an important opportunity. In Europe we should work actively to recruit the best scientific minds. We should ensure a fast-track for key visa and work permit applications, consistent with our broader migration policy objectives.

Second, we should launch a drive to promote inward investment and industrial collaboration.

We need to attract to Europe companies from China, India, and elsewhere in Asia. We should welcome investment partnerships in Europe which allow Chinese and other Asian companies to draw on European expertise and research, design and marketing and production. There is much to do, particularly to help European SMEs to build more links with low-cost Asian firms and so boost their competitiveness.

Third, Europe should pursue a policy of openness to the world.

There is more that the European Commission could do to deepen the EU's economic relationship with China, India and other Asian countries, utilising market access to each others' markets and stimulating the flow of investment. This is a priority for the Barroso Commission over the next three years.

We also need a more active public debate across the EU setting out clearly why growth in China and India is the basis for higher living standards in Europe and can create new job opportunities. The growth of China and India reinforces rather than impedes the Lisbon agenda of economic reform and growth in Europe.

Fourth, we need more explicit policies in Europe to address the problems of the ‘losers' from globalisation and tackle the new inequalities that globalisation brings.

The debate on the future of the European Social Model – or models, more realistically - at the October European Council should focus on this. Our social, regional and industrial policies all need to be updated to adjust to the speed of economic change. The European Commission's job is to lead thinking and help spread good practice across our continent.

Another series of critics of globalisation come from the developing countries: globalisation is widening the gap between rich and poor, they claim. This is a legitimate concern.

There is a growing gap between rich countries and some poor countries that lack the capacity to compete in the global marketplace, for one reason or another. Globalisation is not delivering benefits to every part of the world. Indeed, globalisation in itself is no guarantee of development. The most successful countries are those who have accompanied their economic transformation with political reform; development requires a stable and transparent legislative environment, building high quality infrastructure and putting in place reliable public services. These issues go well beyond the remit of trade policy although I passionately believe that trade should act at the service of development. It is why the issues of trade and aid are inextricably linked. It is why I believe in what I call a progressive approach to market opening – with aid and trade both proceeding in tandem for the poorest countries, joining liberalisation to progressive measures that will enhance the poorest countries' trade capacities. These ideas are at the heart of the Doha Development Round.

Conclusion

Globalisation is not a force of nature, over which we have no control. It requires political responsibility and strong action by governments, both socially and in relation to the environment. It is hopeless to attempt to stop globalisation. But it is equally wrong to think of globalisation as a tidal wave where all we can do is let it wash over us, and leave it to individuals to sink or swim. To make globalisation work, people need active government on their side. In Europe, the primary responsibility rests with our Member States. But at the Commission, we will do our best to contribute where we can.

