It is a great pleasure to be in Beijing, and a particular honour to address students of one of the world's most prestigious universities.

The EU is China's most important trading partner. We import more from China than any other nation. But the relations between our countries have moved far beyond the economic sphere. China is one of the very few 'strategic partners' for the EU, and today we cooperate on a range of political, social, environmental and scientific levels.

China and Europe have many similarities. The EU consists of 27 Member States and we must contend with a level of diversity that here in China is well known. Indeed, the variation of languages and traditions among Chinese regions could be even greater than between the countries of the European Union. For example, the difference between Mandarin and Cantonese is greater than that between Spanish and Italian.

As major global actors, the EU and China recognise common aspirations for social justice and economic development. We also face similar challenges – both domestic and global. For example, our concerns over an ageing population will be familiar to you here in China. Likewise, an issue such as climate change is a matter for policy makers the world over.

Today I want to focus on the challenges that we have in common and the actions we are taking to deal with them.

* * *

China is enjoying spectacular economic growth, expanding at around 9% for the last two decades. It is the fastest economic transformation the world has ever seen. Such figures make it easy to forget that in many respects China is a country in transition. This is a process that Europe, especially the new eastern European members of our Union, has recently experienced. Europe is also going through a period of change. Since the EU's foundation 50 years ago, we have advanced to a high level of integration. The best example is surely the creation of the euro. Our European single currency is a truly impressive achievement of economic integration. In less than a decade the euro has brought macro-economic stability, created very favourable financing conditions and emerged as a strong international currency on a par with the dollar.

Common Domestic Challenges: sharing the solutions

Ageing populations

Let me start by discussing a problem we share in common. Population ageing is a concern shared by policy makers in both China and the EU and so there is a great deal of scope to exchange ideas and solutions.

In Europe, the over 65 population is predicted to increase by 77% by 2050. Of course, the increase in life expectancy which lies behind this trend is very welcome. But there is no question that problems will result from a smaller number of workers having to support a much larger proportion of retirees. Projections indicate that, if no actions are taken, our current potential growth rate could be cut by half and that public spending on pensions, healthcare and long term care will increase by 4% of GDP.

Likewise, China will experience very rapid ageing. The number of Chinese aged 65 and above is expected to raise three fold between 2000 and 2050, bringing your old age population to 332 million. Providing for this growing section of society will be a major undertaking for China just as it is for Europe.

In Europe we have developed a three pillar strategy to cope with the impact of ageing:

First, we are reforming our health and pension systems so that they can be financially viable in the long term and provide adequate care for future generations. Many EU countries have already made significant changes to their pension systems and have raised the age of retirement.

Secondly, we have to raise employment and productivity levels if we want to meet the challenge of a shrinking workforce. Getting more women and older people into work is key while greater investment for innovation and R&D is essential to increase productivity and competitiveness.

Last, public finances must be in good shape before the impact of ageing takes hold. In Europe economies with high debt levels and budgetary deficit have to reduce them fast. Budgetary consolidation in the medium term will make it easier to meet the public finance sustainability.

In this respect, we are making progress in Europe, largely thanks to a rules based framework put in place to support fiscal discipline. However more progress is needed before we can declare our public finances to be on a sound footing.

Ageing will hit our countries in different ways, both in terms of timing and the nature of the economic impact. However, there is no denying that the importance of sound budgetary policies and reforms are universally valuable for coping with this challenge.

I am aware that China has to address the ageing issue from a rather different perspective. Where Europe needs to make the current, relatively generous, social security systems sustainable in the long term, China's challenge is to build a universal, social safety net that is generous enough to avoid excessive precautionary savings and that will resist the shock of a rapid ageing of the population.

China will find the solution which suits her best. But when put on a sustainable basis, universal pension schemes have proven equitable, non-discriminatory, and cost-effective.

And, Chinese authorities may gain useful insights by looking at how EU social security systems are structured as they move to create a sustainable and possibly universal system of social protection.

Regional disparities in growth and income

I want to turn now to a second domestic challenge that we share – managing regional disparities in growth and income. Since the latest accession of 12 Eastern European countries to the EU, the economic and social divergences within the EU have increased.

Indeed, I understand that the difference in income between Shanghai and a province such as Gansu are even greater than between Europe's richest areas, such as Paris and London, and the poorest in the new Member States of Bulgaria and Romania.

Thus we both share a desire for a rapid catching up of our poorest areas– for China, across your 31 provinces, and for the EU, throughout our 27 Member States.

In Europe we place a premium on economic and social convergence. It is essential for our Single Market and our Single currency to function properly, and absolutely necessary for spreading opportunities and alleviating poverty.

Our EU regional policy is a valuable instrument here and we have been evolving its use in recent years to make it more effective. Our conclusions resemble those of the Chinese 11th Five Year Plan - that regional policy can trigger regional growth through investments that target innovation, competitiveness and R&D as well as physical infrastructure.

Indeed, we estimate that regional policy investments in Europe between 2007 and 2013 could create up to 2.5 million new jobs and raise GDP by 10 to 16%.

The amount of transfers to catching up regions of the Union is well below the level of transfers that you find in most federal states. Still, in many cases they have been very effective at accelerating the development of some regions or countries like Ireland and Spain.

Common global challenges: working in partnership

I will now devote the rest of my comments to global challenges. Together the EU and China represent almost one third of the world's population, and as major international players, we have a responsibility to establish a peaceful, secure and stable world, certainly not a job that one nation acting alone could ever hope to achieve. The task of managing global challenges can therefore spur closer partnership and stronger ties of cooperation between the EU and China.

Energy and Climate change

Energy and climate change is a case in point. Climate change threatens economic activity and people's quality of life the world over. China, like the EU, is a net energy importer and its energy needs continue to grow in line with its economic expansion. As a world power that is set to become the earth's largest emitter of carbon dioxide by 2030, China has a large stake in addressing climate change.

The EU too bears an enormous responsibility for this issue. This is why we have adopted a raft of measures to foster energy efficiency and combat climate change. EU leaders have agreed to enhance the functioning of electricity and gas markets in the Union; to improve energy efficiency by 20%; to increase the use of renewable energies by 20%; and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20%. We aim to achieve these targets by the year 2020.

We are convinced that economic instruments are vital to achieve our environmental and energy objectives in an efficient and sustainable manner. In fact, the European Union has a good track record of using market based and fiscal instruments to achieve environmental and energy objectives.

The European emission trading scheme, for example, is the largest multi-country, multi-sector, greenhouse gas emission trading scheme in the world. We are currently working on the extension of this scheme to other sectors like aviation, with a view to cover an even greater proportion of CO2 emissions.

Instruments such as these have proven their effectiveness in Europe and could be effective in other regions of the world. Given the urgency and scale of the challenges we face, we cannot act alone. This is why the cooperation established between the EU and China on this issue is so important.

The Chinese leadership's commitment to increase energy efficiency by 20% in the current five year plan is highly commendable. I know that the Chinese government is concerned about the impact of double digit growth rates on the environment and so I am optimistic that a post-Kyoto solution can be found that will balance China's economic development with its global responsibilities.

Global imbalances

The same spirit of responsibility and partnership should guide our approach to the world economy. As China and the EU are key actors in the international economic system, so global growth and stability is a shared concern. And so long as current account imbalances pose a risk to the global economy, they represent a common challenge.

Although the EU's current account situation is close to balance, we are fully aware that, along with China and the rest of the world, our economies would be damaged by a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances. With this in mind, we have made considerable progress to liberalise product and labour markets and to raise employment. A package of reforms in financial services has accelerated the integration of European financial markets, making them more liquid and internationally competitive. In this way, we are working hard to meet the commitments we have taken with our partners, China included, to reduce global imbalances.

China's booming current account surplus is, together with the large US current account deficit and the surplus from oil producing countries, the biggest source of global imbalances. Therefore, China's contribution to solve this problem will be crucial.

China's economic expansion is currently too dependent on growing investment and raising trade surpluses. Household consumption is now below 40% of GDP, one of the lowest rates in the world.>>

With a shift to a more consumption-driven growth, households could enjoy higher levels of income and welfare, investment expenditures could become more efficient, the financial system could continue its modernization and reform efforts, and the current account deficit could be reduced decisively.

Increased provision of health care and education, unemployment compensation, and the expansion of the pension system could all contribute to reduce the risk perception of Chinese households and provide incentives to spend more. Further reform in the financial sector, higher interest rates, as well as an improvement of productivity and quality of investment are also needed.

In addition, a more flexible exchange rate policy would allow the central bank to raise interest rates and curb investment – in the long run this would help China to rely less on exports and more on consumption and investment geared towards the domestic market.

I know that none of this comes as news to China. Authorities here have already taken measures to strengthen social safety nets and the education system, in particular in the rural areas, and the Chinese government has pledged to reduce the current account surplus by boosting domestic demand, reforming its financial system and gradually changing its exchange rate regime.

Nevertheless, progress until now has been rather slow. The trade surplus continues to rise strongly. A more vigorous approach to reform is needed to prevent the current account surplus from expanding further and to reduce the risks to the global economy. A concerted effort to tackle imbalances would also send a clear message to the protectionist forces that appear to be on the rise in various parts of the world. We must work together in this respect. A well functioning global economy is not a zero sum game, but a win-win situation for China, Europe and the wider world.

Conclusion

Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude.

As EU-China relations move forward, we have much to gain from sharing our knowledge and experience. I believe we can draw valuable lessons from each other's approach to tackling common challenges.

But our mutual interests do not stop there. The EU and China are both dependent upon a stable and growing global economy. We both share a fragile planet that needs protection. These are just two issues that extend beyond national borders and which require a multilateral response, I have not even mentioned migration, terrorism, organised crime or the subject of African development today. As key global actors, we have a responsibility to lead by example. This shared duty serves as the basis for an effective strategic partnership between our regions and an incentive for concerted action.