Statement to the press following
EU-China negotiations on textiles

Statement to the press
Shanghai, China, 10 June 2005

From the beginning of this year the issue of Chinese textiles has been very firmly on my radar screen. This is not surprising. The explosion in imports of Chinese textiles and clothing has created alarm in many European member states, and the issue has threatened to mushroom into a major trade dispute between Europe and China.

Without wishing to turn back the clock on the elimination of quotas in the textiles trade I concluded that economically and politically I had to propose action to manage what was becoming a combustible situation in a number of our Member States. I am a believer in free trade. But I am equally sensitive to the need to be able to adjust and find transitional arrangements in the event of sudden developments and unexpected shocks.

I have always hoped that this issue could be resolved amicably, rather than through the EU taking unilateral measures, even if we are legally entitled to do so. I know that not everyone shares this view. But my firm preference has been to seek an enduring agreement with our strategic partner China in view of our relationship and our mutual interest in strengthening our trade and investment ties over the long term.

I am therefore pleased that it has been possible for the European Commission and the government of China to find a mutually acceptable solution that will manage and ensure a smooth transition through a period extending over the next three years. The agreement provides for agreed transitional growth rates between now and the end of 2007, followed by a further year during which both sides will work together closely in the hope that trade can be conducted without further interference in this sector. These agreed rates will apply to the range of product categories that we have investigated. The categories represent the most sensitive for our Member States. They refer to almost all those mentioned in the request for action submitted by the European textile industry association Eurtex, and more.

Agreed growth rates will apply immediately and for the remainder of 2005. The rates will be adjusted upwards for 2006 and 2007 to provide for a smooth transition to full liberalisation during 2008. In principle the agreement should be a once-and-for-all overall agreement rather than a salami-slice approach that forces us to look at and haggle over every product on a category-by-category basis, as was being threatened without this agreement.

Today's agreement will be fair on both sides. It provides clarity, certainty and predictability and will also provide relief for developing country textile exports to Europe. It is an agreement that helps everyone's interests. It is a win-win-win agreement. The Commission has undertaken to exercise restraint concerning the application of the EU's rights under paragraph 242 of China's WTO accession agreement as full liberalisation is resumed during 2008. I believe that the overall settlement represents a fair deal for China while giving respite and a much needed breathing space to European textile industry.

I want to say something more. Today's agreement is a significant demonstration that China is entering the global economy as a responsible and valued partner. And I say this too. China is entitled to reap the comparative advantages and its WTO accession, while managing its integration into the global economy in a way that avoids fear of China, and in a way that does not provoke a protectionist backlash by European industry and the general public.

I would like to commend the way in which the Chinese government and Minister Bo Xilai in particular have responded to European concerns in this matter. I think this augurs very well for our future relationship.

Finally a quick word on next steps. Obviously this agreement will need to be endorsed by the EU's Member States, but I have already provided them with a first outline of the context of the agreement. I know that this is a difficult issue for many of them and I have been in close contact with several Member State Ministers and I trust that in their final assessment of the agreement from their different standpoints they will show a sense of EU solidarity and unity and a desire to resolve this issue once and for all.

