Statement to the Press:
Anti-dumping investigation into Chinese and Vietnamese leather shoes

Recommendation to Member States

This is the first phase of the European Commission's investigation into allegations of dumping of leather footwear on the European market by China and Vietnam.

There is compelling evidence of serious state intervention on a large and strategic industrial scale in the footwear sector in China and Vietnam. Along with wide evidence of substantially flawed accounting practice, we have found clear evidence of non-commercial loans or capital grants from the state to producers; improper evaluation of assets; non-commercial rates for land-use and important tax breaks for exports.

These disguised subsidies allow Chinese and Vietnamese producers to export leather shoes to Europe at below the true cost of production in their own countries.

Natural comparative advantage is being topped up with anti-competitive behaviour.

This state-supported dumping is causing serious injury to European industry. The contraction of European production mirrors closely the rise in under-priced imports from China and Vietnam. I cannot curb these imports or block their rise. I can, however, remedy the injury of below-cost pricing.

I am recommending to Member States and to my Commission colleagues that a provisional anti-dumping duty of 19.4% for China and 16.8% for Vietnam be introduced.

This recommendation reflects my judgement of the Community's overall economic interest.

I am recommending to Member States that children's shoes and high-tech sports shoes be excluded from the provisional measures I am announcing today. A duty on children shoes would disproportionately affect families with young children and, in my view, would not be in the public interest. For sport shoes, our investigation suggests that there is no longer sufficient production of these shoes in Europe for injury to have been caused.

I am also mindful of the interests of retailers who, prior to my announcement, will have bought and placed goods in transit. I am therefore taking the unprecedented step of recommending that this duty be phased in over a period of six months, beginning at about 4%, not immediately, but in April. The full duty will be in place before the end of the 6 month period for these provisional measures and the damaging effects of dumping will be counteracted. This is a balanced solution.

During this preliminary phase I am launching immediate discussions with both China and Vietnam to encourage them to rectify this unfair trade in footwear. I have spoken to Vietnamese and Chinese Ministers this morning. I welcome their willingness to address the findings of our investigations and to engage constructively in talks.

I can also announce today that on the basis of analysis by the Commission services, I will be recommending to Member States that in the case of allegations of dumping of safety shoes from India and China no provisional measures will be imposed. That investigation will continue but no immediate action will be taken.

Defence against unfair trade is specifically sanctioned by the WTO. I do not use trade defence instruments lightly or casually. On the other hand, it would be irresponsible to ignore clear evidence when this is presented. I will continue to act on this basis and with a strict application of the rules.

Consumer interests

Addressing unacceptable trade practice has been criticised in the strongest possible language by some in the retail sector. They have threatened to pass the costs of any duty on to the consumer using alarmist and speculative language in some cases.

Moreover, there is clear evidence that although leather footwear import prices to the EU over the last five years have fallen by more than 20% consumer prices have remained stable and even risen slightly. Let's be clear what's involved.

Let's be clear. A duty would be just over 1.5 euro on average wholesale prices of 8.5 euro. These shoes sell for between 40-100 euro. The idea that this duty will lead to a consumer price rise of 20% is totally fanciful. I hope importers will retain a sense of proportion in their further comment; not least as I am bending over backwards to cushion the impact of my action on them.

But here is the critical point. Imposing a duty on dumped goods is not a question of asking consumers to subsidise uncompetitive European producers. European leather shoe producers are being asked to bear the costs of unacceptable trade practice.

And, of course, it would appear that the savings from importing dumped goods are not always being passed on to consumers, which suggests an adequate margin of comfort for importers and retailers to adjust to the duty being introduced.

This is not protectionism

I do not accept that acting to limit the damaging effects of this dumping is protectionism. Indeed, my view is that free trade suffers when unfair trade is allowed to flourish.

Europe's ‘lesser duty' anti-dumping rule clearly ensures that anti-dumping measures cannot be used to make imports more expensive than the equivalent EU product – and they can and often do leave the competing export much cheaper than the European equivalent.

We are not targeting China or Vietnam's natural advantage. We are targeting their anti-competitive behaviour.

I need to be crystal clear: anti-dumping measures will not take the form of quantitative restrictions or import quotas. There is no ban on the goods in question and no limit to their export to Europe. We are not closing the door to fairly exported Chinese and Vietnamese goods. In fact that door is open wide.

For those who might be tempted to suggest that Europe is seeking to use its trade defence instruments to block Chinese trade - I would simply point out, that even when this case is included the share of EU-China trade affected by anti-dumping investigations or measures is still less than 2%. 2% of a rapidly growing exports growth by China.

Shoes are not textiles

I do not accept any comparison with textile imports from China. The textile issue concerned fairly traded textile imports, albeit subject to a dramatic and disproportionate increase in volume following the lifting of quotas on Chinese textiles on 1 January 2005.

We addressed this problem, not by triggering a trade war with China but, on the contrary, through a period of restricted growth providing a short adjustment period for European producers leading to full liberalisation in 2008.

I acted with the Chinese to cushion the impact of a massive shift in global trading patterns in textiles. In two years that cushion will be gone.

In the case of leather footwear, the allegation is that goods are being traded in a way that is both unfair and unacceptable under World Trade Organization rules. The European Commission has a legal obligation to investigate such a claim and a legal right to protect European producers against such practice.

Even so, This case concerns about nine out of every 100 pairs of shoes bought by European consumers – a fraction of the product range. It should be seen in this perspective.

Let me add that I remain strongly committed to developing the two way trade and investment relationship between Europe and China, and with other Asian markets including Vietnam.

There is no greater prize for European trade policy in the coming years than the prize of getting these relationships right.

I believe Europe must respect and adjust to the natural advantages these economies have; shifting our own focus to sectors and products where our own skills and technologies give us the edge. This is how trade grows: and that is how Europe's economies have grown over centuries.

But China has a key role to play in her own successful integration into the world trading system. China has responsibilities fully to embrace the rules, to avoid breaches of intellectual property rights, and to open her markets to external produce. This way, China will flourish through free not unfair trade and I will continue to welcome this.

Inevitably frictions and disputes will arise in our relationship. I am committed wherever possible to try to reduce them through dialogue and cooperation. That is true in the case of shoes: but until a solution is reached, action is needed to make sure that the rules of fair trade are fully upheld.

