Introduction

Openness to trade and investment underpins Europe’s prosperity and competitiveness. Trade accounts for almost 35% of the EU’s GDP. 35 million European jobs are linked to exports. The EU is the world’s main provider and the top global destination of foreign direct investment 1 with 16 million European jobs linked to it.

A strong, open and competitive single market enables EU companies to operate and compete globally. On 10 March 2020, the European Commission presented a New Industrial Strategy for Europe which mapped out a clear path for Europe to allow our industry to lead the green and digital transitions based on competition, open markets, world-leading research and technologies and a strong single market.

To reap the full benefits of global trade, Europe will pursue a model of open strategic autonomy. This will mean shaping the new system of global economic governance and developing mutually beneficial bilateral relations, while protecting ourselves from unfair and abusive practices.

Openness to trade and investment is part of the economy’s resilience, but it must go hand in hand with fairness and predictable rules. The current global economic environment is the most difficult in recent memory. Trade openness based on a level playing field is being challenged, as is the objective of seeking mutually beneficial trade relations. This is exemplified by state sponsored unfair trading practices, which disregard market forces and abuse existing international rules, with a view to building up dominance across various sectors of economic activity. Such unfair practices typically include shielding industries from competition through selective market opening, licensing and other investment restrictions, as well as providing subsidies which undermine the level playing field to both state-owned and private sector companies. The distortive economic effects of such practices are relevant in any affected sector, whether strategic or otherwise.

In today’s intertwined global economy, foreign subsidies can however distort the EU internal market and undermine the level playing field. There is an increasing number of incidences in which foreign subsidies appear to have facilitated the acquisition of EU undertakings, influenced other investment decisions or have distorted the market behaviour of their beneficiaries. Within the EU, the single market and its rule book ensure a level playing field for all Member States, economic operators and consumers so they can benefit from the scale and opportunities of the EU economy.

The single market rule book also includes rules on public procurement in order to ensure that undertakings benefit from fair access to public contracts, and that contracting authorities benefit from fair competition.

Competition rules have been part of the EU internal market from the beginning. Notably, EU State aid rules ensure that subsidies by public authorities are compatible with the internal market. Many foreign subsidies would be problematic if they were granted by EU Member States and assessed under EU State aid rules. EU State aid rules however apply only to public support granted by EU Member States. In contrast, subsidies granted by non-EU authorities fall outside EU State aid control.

Moreover, the limited degree of openness of the domestic market of third countries may further distort the market. Where a beneficiary faces no or limited competition in its domestic market, it could leverage its privileged position in other markets, thereby enjoying an undue advantage over others. Foreign subsidies originating in States where access to markets is closed or restricted may be even more likely to cause distortions.

In the current context of the COVID-19 crisis, EU Member States grant significant amounts of State aid to support individual undertakings and the EU economy as a whole. It is a situation in which State aid is an indispensable means at the disposal of public authorities to stabilise the economy and accelerate research in the coronavirus. At the same time, public support continues to be subject to EU State aid control also in the current situation, ensuring for example its proportionality and minimising the potentially distortive effect on competition. Moreover, the current assessment framework is temporary and limited in scope to crisis measures. The current situation illustrates the importance of preserving the level playing field within the internal market, even in exceptional economic circumstances.

This White Paper intends to launch a broad discussion with Member States, other European institutions, all stakeholders, including industry, social partners, civil society organisations, researchers, the public in general and any other interested party on the best way to effectively address the challenges identified. The results of the consultation on the White Paper will prepare the ground for choosing the most appropriate way to address the distortions created by foreign subsidies, including appropriate proposals for legal instruments.

The White Paper first outlines the rationale for addressing foreign subsidies, including typical examples of foreign subsidies that appear to undermine the level playing field in the internal market. The White Paper then presents an analysis of the existing legal instruments to address foreign subsidies and discusses the question of a regulatory gap. Subsequently, the White Paper sets out preliminary substantive and procedural orientations for legal instruments to address the regulatory gap in relation to:

·Foreign subsidies distorting the internal market regarding

othe general market operation of economic operators active in the EU;

oacquisitions of EU undertakings;

opublic procurement procedures;

·Foreign subsidies in the context of access to EU funding.

2Problem definition

2.1Foreign subsidies risk distorting the EU internal market

EU State aid rules help to preserve a level playing field in the internal market among undertakings with regard to subsidies provided by EU Member States. However, there are no such rules for subsidies that non-EU authorities grant to undertakings operating in the internal market. This situation may include circumstances where the benefitting undertakings are owned or ultimately controlled by a non-EU company or a foreign government.

There is limited information on the actual amount of foreign subsidies being granted. This is mainly due to a lack of transparency and low compliance 2 with the obligation to notify subsidies under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM Agreement 3 ). Some reports by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) indicate however that government interventions appear widespread in certain sectors. 4  

The EU economy is open to foreign investment. This is reflected by recent economic data. In 2016, 3% of European companies were owned or controlled by non-EU investors representing 35% of total assets and around 16 million jobs. 5 More recently, there has been an increase in investment also from third countries other than from traditional investors such as the United States and Canada. Investment by state-owned enterprises has grown rapidly over the last few years, as has the presence of "offshore investors".

The level of foreign direct investment (FDI) to the EU, its composition and the top recipient Member States are not a constant and keep changing. The scale of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the level of FDI inflows and the origins of FDI to the EU remains to be seen.

Greater openness to foreign investment has come with opportunities for the EU economy but also with increased risks, such as foreign subsidisation, which needs to be controlled to avoid undermining competitiveness and the level playing field in the EU market. Concerns about subsidisation may also be exacerbated where public undertakings are not subject to the same rules as private undertakings, and where financial relations between the state and its undertakings are not transparent. The Treaty is neutral as regards public or private ownership of undertakings. Both public and private undertakings are subject to competition rules. In addition, under the Transparency Directive, 6 Member States are obliged to be transparent on the financial relations between them and their public undertakings in addition to complying with the transparency requirements under EU State aid rules. 7  

As in the case of State aid granted by EU Member States, foreign subsidies can distort competition in the internal market and result in an uneven playing field in which less efficient operators grow and increase market share at the expense of more efficient operators. In a similar manner, foreign subsidies may also result in costly and often wasteful emulation and lead to subsidy races between public authorities. Furthermore, the lack of transparency and reciprocity in accessing third-country markets are additional factors that tend to exacerbate such harmful effects.

In addition to the general concerns about foreign subsidies provided to undertakings in the EU, there is a specific concern about foreign subsidies in the contexts of the acquisition of EU targets and of public procurement.

As regards acquisitions the price that acquirers are willing to pay typically reflects the efficiency gains or increase in revenues they can obtain by acquiring the asset. However, the subsidy may allow the subsidised acquirer to pay a higher price to acquire the asset than it would otherwise have paid, and can thus distort the valuation of EU assets. Foreign subsidies therefore may lead to excessive purchase prices (outbidding) and at the same time prevent non-subsidised acquirers from achieving efficiency gains or accessing key technologies.

Foreign subsidies therefore may lead to an inefficient overall allocation of resources and, more particularly, a loss of competitiveness and innovation potential of companies that do not receive such subsidies. In some cases, the granting of foreign subsidies can also be driven by a strategic objective to establish a strong presence in the EU or to promote an acquisition and later transfer technologies to other production sites, possibly outside of the EU. There is thus a specific need to ensure a level playing field for the acquisitions of EU targets. This can ensure that all companies compete on equal footing to acquire key assets and stay at the technological frontier, while preserving the benefits that international competition and inward foreign direct investments deliver.

The EU procurement markets are largely open to third country bidders. EU-wide publication of tenders ensures transparency and creates market opportunities for EU and non-EU companies alike. However, EU companies do not always compete on an equal footing with companies benefiting from foreign subsidies. Subsidised companies may be able to make more advantageous offers, thus either discouraging non-subsidised companies from participating in the first place or winning contracts to the detriment of non-subsidised more efficient companies. 8 It is therefore important to ensure that recipients of foreign subsidies bidding for public contracts in the EU compete on an equal footing.

Many public buyers, mindful of their budgets, have an incentive to award contracts to bidders offering low prices regardless of whether those prices are facilitated by foreign subsidies. This may be the case not only for contracts awarded on the basis of price, but also for contracts awarded on the basis of the best price-quality-ratio, as quality criteria rarely compensate important differences in prices, such as those that may be enabled by foreign subsidies.

The same distortive effect can occur when companies benefitting from foreign subsidies seek access to funding from the EU budget.

2.2Overview of cases involving foreign subsidies 

There could be several objectives which non-EU authorities pursue by granting foreign subsidies, not necessarily entirely of economic nature, and also different ways in which a subsidy may be provided to an undertaking in the EU. A few examples are provided below.

First, undertakings may receive subsidies to promote their existing activities in the EU. Foreign states may give subsidies (e.g. grants) or provide cheaper financing to an undertaking in the EU (e.g. a subsidiary located in the EU). Foreign states may also give a subsidy to a parent company located outside the EU (e.g. corporate tax regimes providing selective incentives), which then in turn finances the subsidiary located in the EU through intragroup transactions. An undertaking in the EU may also receive financing at preferential terms from foreign banks directly upon instruction of foreign states. Furthermore, third countries might have cooperation arrangements with EU local authorities or EU development banks, and may thus channel foreign subsidies through these authorities or banks to undertakings in the EU. 9  

In some cases, foreign subsidies are granted with the express objective of enabling companies to submit bids for public contracts, at prices that are below market price or even below cost, directly “underbidding” to the detriment of competing non-subsidised undertakings. Subsidies may also generally facilitate aggressive market conduct. Such behaviour, not driven by normal commercial considerations, may be driven by strategic goals, in order to get a foothold in strategically important markets or regions, or to get privileged access to critical and major infrastructure, including infrastructure governed by the rules of Directive 2014/25/EU.

Finally, foreign subsidies can also facilitate acquisitions to help non-EU companies expand in the EU. Non-EU authorities may seek to steer acquisitions by offering preferential financing, loan guarantees and other means of reducing capital costs. Such measures may directly aim at supporting the outward investment of undertakings by granting dedicated tax rebates (income tax reductions) or financing from government supported investment funds or intermediaries. 10 All these different possible benefits can have a significant impact on the premiums offered for acquisitions. A substantial number of foreign direct investments takes place through offshore financial centres which may offer special tax conditions. Notably, 10.9% 11 of the foreign investors controlling EU companies are established in such offshore financial centres.

