Thank you very much for AmCham for inviting me to this transatlantic conference. It is always very nice to participate in your events, because we are the most natural partners. It is easy to work with you; we share the same agenda, same objectives, and most importantly, the same interests on various issues.

I like very much the word transatlanticism, because we have taken it for granted for many years because there have not been major problems in Europe or in transatlantic relationship. But now it is the time to fight for it. Transatlanticism has deeply rooted to European DNA. We are very well aware that the same thing is in the United States also, if looking at the people in the Congress or in the business community, we share the same vision, the same view on transatlanticism. So this is the time when we have to tell to our citizens on both sides of the Atlantic what  it means. We have to update it and we must be ready to fight for it, because like High Representative Mogherini yesterday said, we are the most natural partners.

One of our main duties is to create stability. Stability is something which you do not really notice, it is just like oxygen. You only notice it once it is running out. So, our duty is to create stability on both sides of the Atlantic, but not only for us, but also for the rest of the world. We must be ready to fight against cheap populism on both continents, but also in other parts of the world.

We have seen in Finland that some countries produce more security than consume it. The transatlantic relationship should be based on this principle. We should be capable of producing more security and stability than we consume for our own purposes. So, there should be a surplus of security and stability coming out of our bilateral relationship, which is good for the rest of the world.

 

Our cooperation has always been based on shared values and commitment to democracy, peace, the rule of law, stability and open, but also rules-based and fair trade. The common rules and cooperation we have put in place have allowed managing our economic relationship based on constructive dialogue rather than unilateral actions. As a result of this, we trade goods worth €1,7 billion every single day. Even the US mutual investment represents 60 percent of the world foreign investment stock. So, just another good example, that we are the most natural allies.

Ladies and Gentlemen, the world has changed over the last decades and keeps changing. The traditional West has notably seen the rise of Asia and in particular China as a strong economic power.

In the 1980's and 1990's, command economy systems have largely been abandoned as they proved unsuccessful to create durable prosperity. Politicians in countries of the ex. Soviet Union or in China accepted that a certain dose of market economy and trade openness was needed. So they changed their way of functioning. And for China this was a resounding success as they became the largest world exporter and the world factory after having joined the WTO.

This modified trade flows of the West and since then, the EU and the US have experienced large trade deficits with China. To a large extent, this has been because China had lower costs of production and cheaper labour.

But also in certain cases, state influence has remained stronger than it is in the west. And subsidies led to the accumulation of overcapacity in sectors such as steel and aluminium, which generated dumping and unfair trade for EU and the US industries.

Both the EU and the US have recently taken action against this in the form of anti-dumping measures on Chinese steel and aluminium imports – which are allowed by the WTO. Thanks to this, our industry has been able to survive for the time being. The problem is not over yet, though, and this is why we created a Global Forum on Steel Overcapacity in which the EU and US work together with China and others to identify and eliminate overcapacity and support measures that fuel it. Such work should be expedited. And we should also ideally update WTO rules on subsidies which are incomplete and do not cover well all situations. This would provide stronger discipline on massive subsidies we see in China that can create distortions and hurt EU and US companies.

The EU is ready to work with the US on this agenda. This is why we have created a trilateral cooperation on level playing field also with Japan. We hope that China will understand the value of a strong rules-based order and join our effort, even if it means going further in the reform of their economic model where the state still has a strong role.

 

Ladies and Gentlemen, we understand the frustration of US politicians and companies on the slow progress on the above agenda and the criticism of globalisation as being unfair in certain respects. Yes, there must be stronger political will, in particular in China, to upgrade some of the global trade rules, strictly abide by them, reduce overcapacity and subsidisation, and also offer more reciprocal market access. We have the same frustration and willingness in Europe to see faster and more concrete action in this respect. We are ready to step up our joint action to achieve this result.

In the meantime, we must avoid the temptation of unilateral protectionist moves such as the one we are seeing with proposed US steel and aluminium tariffs that would affect the entire world, including the EU.

First there is a risk to break the rules-based system that remains crucial to settle disputes peacefully.

Second, the EU is not the problem in this case. EU steel and aluminium industries are producing based on market principles. We trade fairly. We have been hit equally as the US industry by overcapacity and have had to make painful adjustment and take anti-dumping measures to protect us. We are also strong historical allies in the field of defence and security. It is therefore unfair and shooting at the wrong target if the US hit us with tariffs. The allegation that EU exports may cause a threat to US national security also doesn't appear justified given the volumes we export and the situation on the US market. We believe that any restriction to international trade based on national security consideration should be used very carefully and surgically. Otherwise there is a risk to undermine the whole rules-based world order.

US tariffs would also hit US companies and workers in the numerous downstream sectors that use steel and aluminium as input in their production, as they would pay higher prices. We have evidence of this. Last time when this happened in the early 2000s, the US lost thousands and thousands of jobs because of this.  

 

The Commission has already signalled that we would be ready to react if the US would proceed with imposing a tariff on EU steel and aluminium exports. We would notably launch a WTO dispute on the US decision which we believe is not in line with their international obligations. We would also take WTO compatible and well calibrated safeguard measures to protect EU industry from imports of steel and aluminium that cannot enter the US market anymore. But we would seek to preserve historical flows not to unduly restrict trade. Finally, as we consider that US restrictions are disguised safeguards, we would use the possibility offered by WTO rules to take calibrated measures on a limited number American products to rebalance benefits that we have given to the US in the past.

But our preference is of course to avoid this situation and convince the US to exclude EU steel and aluminium exports from the scope of the measures they envisage.

President Trump has signalled that allies can be excluded. And we are confident that the whole EU will be treated as such. We do not accept distortion of a level playing field between the European companies and between the EU Member States. We don't want to see "pick the winner" impact, where some companies are better placed than others.

We are not in favour of any escalation in trade restrictions. We believe that there are only losers in such scenario. We still remember vividly what happened in Europe when the world took a protectionist turn after the 1929 crash. This destroyed wealth and jobs in Europe, fuelling nationalism and populism, which created favourable conditions for the Second World War.

Ladies and Gentleman, now is the time to remember history, draw lessons from the past. Now is the time to be responsible, and have the long term interest of all in mind. Europe and the US should be partners to harness globalisation.

The EU is a peace project and we also firmly believe in open, rules-based and fair trade, which creates conditions for a healthy competition amongst businesses. The EU and the US have different levels of duties on one or the other products. The EU has, for instance, slightly higher tariffs than the US on cars, but the US has higher tariffs than the EU on trucks, textiles, shoes or many luxury products in which the EU excel. Our respective overall average duties are very similar. And we both believe in market economy and in avoiding state-led economic distortions. Our economic exchanges are therefore taking place on a level playing field. We must preserve our unique and historical partnership, avoid hurting our trade and investment exchanges, and work together to address global economic distortions where they exist, while upgrading the global rules-book to harness globalisation for the better of everybody.

So, Ladies and Gentlemen, there is a lot of work to do on the both sides of the Atlantic. I wish and I know that AmCham will be a close partner for deeper and truthful cooperation between the United States and the EU.

Thank you very much. 

