I am glad to be here today, at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies

We are living times of major geopolitical challenges which can reshape the world.

The succession of crises of the past few years – the COVID pandemic, Putin's war against Ukraine, the energy crisis – has shed light on the end of globalisation the way we knew it. Dependencies are used as weapons against us. Supply chains become geopolitical instruments. Without industrial production capacity, we risk becoming net importers, being exposed to shortages, and exporting our jobs.

But while some have tried to weaken the European Union, the effect has been the opposite.

As the world was in lockdown, and even our US partners applied an “America First” policy on vaccines, Europe rose to the challenge and became the globe's top vaccine producer.

Europe's efforts to reinforce our defence and space industries to ensure our collective security are yielding significant results.

And our resolve to “decouple” from Russia is greater than ever, even if our companies and households face much steeper energy bills than the rest of the world.

2023 will remain a challenging year for all of us. In these testing times, rather than self-isolating, it is important to work on well-established as well as potential new partnerships.

Clearly, the United States will remain Europe's most important ally. We need this strong transatlantic partnership among equals that builds on what we have achieved together so far, and also evolves in light of today's new realities.

Firstly, on the security front. Europe and the US partnership has shown all its value and efficiency in the joint reaction to the war in Ukraine and our close coordination on sanctions and arms transfers.

The return of war on the European continent has been a wake-up call for us. It has made all of our Member States realise the need to invest more and better in our common defence and to take more responsibility in meeting Europe's security needs, as reflected in the adoption of our Strategic Compass, our new EU defence doctrine.

What we do at European level to support Ukraine deserves more attention I believe, especially from this side of the Atlantic, as it is unprecedented. With a total of $50bn of aid already sent - out of which $10bn worth of weapons - and $19bn approved for 2023, Europe is a key player supporting Ukraine.    

Let me reassure you: a stronger European Union in defence means a stronger NATO, which will remain at the heart of Europe's security.  

So there is nothing to fear in Europe moving forward and increasingly becoming a security provider for the continent.

The war is also reshaping how we approach new contested areas such as cyber.

Europe has developed the capabilities, the regulatory frameworks and the political willingness to increase our joint cyber security. We are ready to bring these to the table to build a strong partnership with the US, which is one of the main objectives of me being here in Washington. Yesterday, together with Secretary Mayorkas, we launched at political level the EU-US cyber dialogue.

It will focus on very concrete deliverables on 1) common situational awareness and structured exchange of information 2) cybersecurity standards for hardware and software, and 3) cybersecurity of critical infrastructure.

While the US has developed strong operational cyber capacity, I am happy to see that it is now developing a more stringent regulatory approach with the upcoming cyber strategy to be announced.

Still under the question of security, I strongly believe we need to develop stronger common ground on technology security.

We cannot allow China to access the most advanced technologies, be they in semiconductors, quantum, cloud & edge, AI or connectivity.

I see a very strong alignment on this agenda between the EU and the US, even if we may sometimes differ on the methods. We worked towards 5G cybersecurity to remove high risk suppliers from our networks and we are following closely the ongoing Chinese investments into European critical infrastructures.

On semiconductors, both the EU and the US have put forward Chips Acts to attract advanced chips mega fabs to be developed on our respective soil. This will allow us to rebalance and secure our supply chains, reducing our collective dependence on Asia.   

A word, in this context, on the US' bold decision on export controls of semiconductors. In Europe we fully agree with the objective of depriving China from the most advanced chips. And the same goes for quantum technologies.

You will always find Europe by your side when it comes to ensuring our common security in technology. But action should be limited to what is necessary from a security point of view, and done in full, transparent and open partnership with Europe.

Investment in critical infrastructure is another case in point. Take the example of undersea cables. Today Europe is too reliant on a single route. And we are discussing the idea of an Artic cable connecting Europe to Japan. But why couldn't we make this cable a “G7 cable”, connecting all allies: US, Canada, UK, Europe and Japan?

The second dimension of a renewed partnership lies with our respective approach to fighting climate change. The green transition is a massive transformation for our societies and economies, and, above all, for our industrial fabric.

One that requires new energy sources, securing entire supply chains, as well as new skills, on both sides of the Atlantic.

With our Green Deal programme, Europe wants to be the first climate neutral continent by 2050. This means a largely electrified continent, relying on nuclear power and renewable energies such as solar and wind power. It also means new ways of storing electricity: batteries or hydrogen. And what do all these technologies have in common? Raw materials. Lots of raw materials, like lithium, cobalt, rare earths. And also semiconductors.

We will need to invest $490 billion per year (private and public) to drive this transformation. 3% of our GDP. But if this is used to buy Chinese solar panels, batteries, or refined lithium, we will have only achieved replacing a dependency on fossil fuels with new dependencies.

It is high time to reconcile climate neutrality policy with industrial competitiveness policy.

The US have defined their approach in the Inflation Reduction Act. And yes, there are some elements of the IRA that are still an issue when it comes to discriminatory provisions with regards to European companies. We are working with the US to address them – we need results quickly.

Overall, the IRA will not only fight climate change, it will also attract and secure key industrial value chains – the clean tech industries – in the US. And we already see the impact: a pull factor for European investment towards the US.

Now Europe must also develop its own policy approach to secure its industrial clean tech basis. And we are doing just that: In March, we will adopt a Net-Zero Industry Act, as announced by Commission President von der Leyen.

We are looking carefully at US policies for inspiration, without emulating all their elements.

What are we aiming at?

Europe needs a more agile and favourable regulatory framework in areas like permitting. And make sure that public money is spent smartly and efficiently. With speed, predictability, and fostering production in strategic value chains. And in addition to remaining a leading exporter we want to remain a top destination of foreign investment, but on our terms, and with added value for Europeans.

Needless to say, there will be no clean tech industry without secure and sustainable access to raw materials. This is why the Net-Zero Industry Act will go hand with a Critical Raw Materials Act, also in March.

I know this is an area of shared concern for the US and Europe, as global demand for raw materials is not matched by supply.

I just arrived from Namibia, where I visited the potentially largest lithium mine, and where lies the potentially biggest rare earth reserve in the world. Totally under-exploited. But as in many African countries, Chinese activism is extremely important. They are fast, massive and without any concerns for the economic development of the country: extracting and sending the raw minerals to be refined in China.

We must develop another model. A new type of partnership to secure our supply chains and allow sourcing countries to benefit from local added value, including ramping up refining, processing and recycling capacities.

Last and not least, a strong dimension of our transatlantic partnership concerns the regulation of online platforms.

For years, these platforms benefited from a “free pass”.

This has changed now in Europe, where we just adopted the Digital Services Act and the Digital Markets Act to reorganise our digital space, both for societal and economic reasons.

The DSA will protect our citizens in the virtual world against disinformation or cyberbullying of children. The DMA will ensure fair competition in the access to the virtual space so that platforms cannot abuse their gatekeeper position.

I am in contact with platforms in Europe and all over the world so they get ready to comply with this new legislation, which we will enforce rigorously, including by applying sanctions where necessary. 

In Europe, the largest digital market in the world with its 450 million population, online platforms will no longer be able to act like they are “too big to care”. As it was the case for the protection of personal data, EU is a pioneer here.

I understand the debate is ongoing in the US around section 230 with a clear position of the President of the United States in a recent oped. We are open and willing to share our experience and solutions with the US law makers.

Ladies and gentlemen,

The EU and US have been allies for decades.

As the world and the geopolitical order is being reshaped, this alliance must also continue to evolve and adapt.

We have shown great collective resolve and unity in the face of Putin's war. This is central.

But our alliance on security must also grow into an alliance on technology, raw materials, and big tech. These are the pillars of a renewed transatlantic partnership which I am glad to be able to discuss with my counterparts here in the US.