Preamble
We, the Leaders of the Group of Seven (G7), gathered in Apulia to reaffirm our enduring unity and determination to meet global challenges at a crucial moment in history and as the international community confronts multiple interconnected crises.

We reiterate our shared belief in democratic principles and free societies, universal human rights, social progress, and respect for multilateralism and the rule of law. We commit to providing opportunities and pursuing shared prosperity. We seek to strengthen international rules and norms for the benefit of all.

Our work is grounded in our commitment to respect the UN Charter, safeguard international peace and security, and uphold the free and open rules-based international order. We will support more effective, inclusive and equitable global governance that reflects our changing world. We reaffirm our commitment to uphold human dignity and the rule of law in all parts of the world.

We are working together and with others to address the pressing challenges of our time. We are:

Standing in solidarity to support Ukraine’s fight for freedom and its reconstruction for as long as it takes. In the presence of President Zelenskyy, we decided to make available approximately USD 50 billion leveraging the extraordinary revenues of the immobilized Russian sovereign assets, sending an unmistakable signal to President Putin. We are stepping up our collective efforts to disarm and defund Russia’s military industrial complex.
United in supporting the comprehensive deal that has been put forward, that would lead to an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, the release of all hostages, and a credible pathway towards peace that leads to a two-state solution. We also call for a significant and sustained increase in humanitarian assistance.
Engaging with African countries, in a spirit of equitable and strategic partnership. As they work to deliver sustainable development and industrial growth for their people, we are advancing our respective efforts to invest in sustainable infrastructure, including through the PGII, and we launched the Energy for Growth in Africa initiative, together with several African partners.
Acting to enable countries to invest in their future and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), recognizing that reducing poverty and tackling global challenges go hand in hand. We are doing our part to achieve better, bigger and more effective Multilateral Development Banks, making it possible for the World Bank to boost its lending by USD 70 billion over the next ten years. We are calling for action from the international community to address debt burdens.
Reinforcing global food security and enhancing climate resilience, including by launching the Apulia Food Systems Initiative.
Reaffirming our commitment to gender equality. Together with International Financial Institutions, we will unlock at least USD 20 billion over three years in investments to boost women’s empowerment.
Taking concrete steps to address the triple crisis of climate change, pollution, and biodiversity loss, including by submitting ambitious 1.5°C aligned Nationally Determined Contributions. We will spearhead global efforts to preserve forests and oceans, and to end plastic pollution.
Affirming our collective commitment and enhanced cooperation to address migration, tackle the challenges and seize the opportunities that it presents, in partnership with countries of origin and transit. We will focus on the root causes of irregular migration, efforts to enhance border management and curb transnational organized crime, and safe and regular pathways for migration. We launched the G7 Coalition to prevent and counter the smuggling of migrants.
Deepening our cooperation to harness the benefits and manage the risks of Artificial Intelligence (AI). We will launch an action plan on the use of AI in the world of work and develop a brand to support the implementation of the International Code of Conduct for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems.
Fostering strong and inclusive global economic growth, maintaining financial stability and investing in our economies to promote jobs and accelerate digital and clean energy transitions. We also remain committed to strengthening the rules-based multilateral trading system and to implementing a more stable and fairer international tax system fit for the 21st century.
Acting together to promote economic resilience, confront non-market policies and practices that undermine the level playing field and our economic security, and strengthen our coordination to address global overcapacity challenges.
In taking forward all these priorities, our partnership in the G7 will continue to be guided by our joint commitment to cooperate openly and transparently in a coordinated manner.

We are grateful for the presence of His Holiness Pope Francis and for his contribution.  

In a spirit of shared responsibility, we warmly welcome the participation of the Leaders of Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, India, Jordan, Kenya, Mauritania, Tunisia, Türkiye, and the United Arab Emirates. 

Indo-Pacific
We reiterate our commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific, based on the rule of law, which is inclusive, prosperous, and secure, grounded on sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful resolution of disputes, fundamental freedoms, and human rights. Peace and stability in the region are key to promoting global prosperity, and developments there can directly affect global security. We reaffirm our unwavering support for ASEAN centrality and unity and our commitment to promoting cooperation in line with the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. We also affirm our intention to work to support Pacific Island Countries’ priorities, as articulated through the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. We seek constructive and stable relations with China and recognize the importance of direct and candid engagement to express concerns and manage differences. We act in our national interest. Given China’s role in the international community, cooperation is necessary to address global challenges, and we continue to engage in areas of common interest. We call on China to step up efforts to promote international peace and security, and to work with us to tackle the climate, biodiversity, and pollution crises, combat illicit synthetic drug trafficking, ensure global macroeconomic stability, support global health security, and address vulnerable countries’ debt sustainability and financing needs.

We recognize the importance of China in global trade. We are committed to advancing free and fairtrade, a level playing field, and balanced economic relations, while updating and strengthening the multilateral rule-based trading system with the WTO at its core. We are not trying to harm China or thwart its economic development, indeed a growing China that plays by international rules and norms would be of global interest. However, we express our concerns about China’s persistent industrial targeting and comprehensive non-market policies and practices that are leading to global spillovers, market distortions and harmful overcapacity in a growing range of sectors, undermining our workers, industries, and economic resilience and security. We are not decoupling or turning inwards. We are de-risking and diversifying supply chains where necessary and appropriate, and fostering resilience to economic coercion. We further call on China to refrain from adopting export control measures, particularly on critical minerals, that could lead to significant global supply chain disruptions. With these concerns in mind, together with partners, we will invest in building our and their respective industrial capacities, promote diversified and resilient supply chains, and reduce critical dependencies and vulnerabilities. We will strengthen diplomatic efforts and international cooperation, including in the WTO, to encourage fair practices and build resilience to economic coercion. We will continue to take actions, as necessary and appropriate, to protect our workers and businesses from unfair practices, to level the playing field and remedy ongoing harm. We call on China to uphold its commitment to act responsibly in cyberspace. We will continue our efforts to disrupt and deter persistent, malicious cyber activity stemming from China, which threatens our citizens’ safety and privacy, undermines innovation, and puts our critical infrastructure at risk. We recognize the necessity of protecting certain advanced technologies that can be used to threaten our national security, without unduly limiting trade and investment. We reaffirm that maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait is indispensable to international security and prosperity. We support Taiwan's meaningful participation in international organizations, including in the World Health Assembly and WHO technical meetings, as a member where statehood is not a prerequisite and as an observer or guest where it is. There is no change in the basic positions of the G7 members on Taiwan, including stated one China policies. We call for a peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues. We remain seriously concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas and reiterate our strong opposition to any unilateral attempt to change the status quo by force or coercion. We continue opposing China’s dangerous use of coast guard and maritime militia in the South China Sea and its repeated obstruction of countries’ high seas freedom of navigation. We express serious concern about the increasing use of dangerous maneuvers and water cannons against Philippine vessels. In this regard, we reaffirm that there is no legal basis for China’s expansive maritime claims in the South China Sea, and we oppose China’s militarization, and coercive and intimidation activities in the South China Sea. We re-emphasize the universal and unified character of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and reaffirm UNCLOS’s important role in setting out the legal framework that governs all activities in the oceans and the seas. We reiterate that the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on 12 July 2016 is a significant milestone, which is legally binding upon the parties to those proceedings, and a useful basis for peacefully resolving disputes between the parties.We express our deep concern at the People’s Republic of China’s support to Russia. We call on China to press Russia to stop its military aggression and immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw its troops from Ukraine. We encourage China to support a comprehensive, just and lasting peace based on territorial integrity and the principles and purposes of the UN Charter, including through its direct dialogue with Ukraine. China’s ongoing support for Russia’s defense industrial basis enabling Russia to maintain its illegal war in Ukraine and has significant and broad-based security implications. We call on China to cease the transfer of dual-use materials, including weapons components and equipment, that are inputs for Russia’s defense sector. We remain concerned by the human rights situation in China, including in Tibet and in Xinjiang where forced labor is a major concern to us. We are also worried by China’s crackdown on Hong Kong's autonomy, independent institutions, and civil society and continued erosion of rights and freedom, including through the recent enactment of legislation under Article 23 of the Basic Law that has broad and vaguely defined provisions regarding “sedition”, “state secrets,” and interactions with foreign entities. We express concerns about the use of such laws to silence dissent in Hong Kong and overseas, including politically motivated prosecutions. These developments will make it harder to live, work and do business in Hong Kong. We call on China not to conduct or condone activities aimed at undermining the security and safety of our communities and the integrity of our democratic institutions, and to act in strict accordance with its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations .We reiterate our call for the complete, verifiable, and irreversible dismantlement of all North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles. We urge all UN Member States to fully implement all relevant UN Security Council resolutions and reiterate our deep disappointment with Russia’s veto in March on the UNSCR 1718 Committee Panel of Experts mandate renewal. We strongly condemn North Korea’s continued development of its ballistic missile program in defiance of multiple UNSCRs, including through launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) and space launch vehicles using ballistic missile technologies. We condemn in the strongest possible terms the increasing military cooperation between North Korea and Russia, including North Korea’s export and Russia’s procurement of North Korean ballistic missiles in direct violation of relevant UNSCRs, as well as Russia’s use of these missiles against Ukraine. We are also deeply concerned about the potential for any transfer of nuclear or ballistic missiles-related technology to North Korea, in violation of the relevant UNSCRs. We urge Russia and North Korea to immediately cease all such activities and abide by relevant UNSCRs. We reiterate our commitment to counter sanctions evasion and strengthen enforcement of all North Korea related UNSCRs. We call on North Korea to accept repeated offers of dialogue, to enhance regional peace and security. We strongly condemn North Korea’s choice to prioritize its unlawful WMD and ballistic missile programs over the welfare of the people in North Korea and we demand that it abandons these programs. We urge North Korea to respect human rights, facilitate access for international humanitarian organizations, and resolve the abductions issue immediately. We reiterate our firm condemnation of the brutal repression of the people of Myanmar by the Myanmar military regime, and express our concern with the expanding humanitarian crisis across the country. We deplore the implementation of the 2010 People’s Military Service Law. This is causing further internal and regional displacement, risks exacerbating divides and hampering reconciliation. Accountability for serious crimes committed in the whole country remains essential. We are particularly concerned that sectarian tensions could inflame Rakhine again, hindering the creation of conditions for voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of Rohingya refugees and all displaced persons, while propelling regional instability. We reiterate our demands for unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need, that all parties respect human rights and international humanitarian law, and for the release of those arbitrarily detained. We reaffirm that an inclusive dialogue with all stakeholders is essential to restore foundations for a durable democratic process. We also reiterate the importance of UNSCR 2669 and continue to support the UN’s further engagement in the crisis and ASEAN’s efforts to achieve the implementation of the Five-Point Consensus. We restate our appeal on all States to prevent or to halt the flow of arms and dual-use material, including jet fuel, to the Myanmar military, and to contribute to the search for a viable political solution which respects the democratic aspirations of Myanmar’s people.

Global Economy and Finance 

We acknowledge that the global economy has shown greater resilience than expected, but it remains exposed to risks arising from geopolitical tensions, renewed volatility in energy prices, and further disruptions to the smooth functioning of supply chains. Our policy efforts will continue to focus on promoting innovation, the just green and digital transitions, and productivity growth, while gradually rebuilding fiscal buffers, and ensuring price and financial stability. We also reaffirm our existing G7 exchange rate commitments. We express concerns about the comprehensive use of non-market policies and practices that create global spillovers. We encourage work, among all relevant tracks, to assess the macroeconomic impact of subsidies, and other industrial and trade policy measures globally, based on comparable information; and to foster a dialogue with non-G7 countries on issues related to industrial policies, economic fragmentation, market concentration risks and overcapacity. To achieve these goals, we will enhance cooperation to advance a G7 dialogue between relevant ministries, and, as appropriate, also engage partners beyond the G7, in addition to the IMF, WBG, WTO, and OECD. We underline the importance of the work carried out by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Standard-Setting Bodies to identify, monitor and address vulnerabilities in the financial system. We strongly support ongoing work to enhance the resilience of the nonbank financial intermediation sector. We also reaffirm our commitment to implement effective regulatory and supervisory frameworks for crypto assets, and welcome initiatives to take forward the G20 Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-border Payments. We reiterate the importance of stepping up global efforts to combat money-laundering, terrorist, and proliferation financing, and support the relevant Financial Action Task Force (FATF)’s initiatives. We reiterate our strong political commitment to a more stable and fairer international tax system, fit for the 21st century. We are committed to finalizing the work within the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework, with a view to open for signature the Multilateral Convention on Pillar One by the end of June 2024, and we call for further progress on the implementation of Pillar Two. We welcome progress made on tax transparency and support the effective implementation of the Crypto Asset Reporting Framework by the relevant jurisdictions. We remain committed to fostering international cooperation on tax issues, building on existing achievements, with the broad participation of developing and developed countries. We will continue to work constructively with the Brazilian G20Presidency to advance international cooperation. We will work to increase our efforts aimed at progressive and fair taxation of individuals. We acknowledge the discussions at the UN Ad Hoc Committee for a Framework Convention on International Tax Cooperation, emphasizing the importance of consensus-based decisions to support a stable and predictable international tax system, promote inclusive and effective international tax cooperation, prioritizing issues such as enhancing domestic resource mobilization and tax capacity building for developing countries and emerging markets. Mounting debt burdens are constraining the ability of low- and middle-income countries to invest in their futures and achieve the SDGs. We call on all stakeholders to redouble efforts and improve the ability to help low- and middle-income countries that fall into debt distress. This includes finalizing outstanding country cases, making future debt treatment more transparent and timelier, and improving our toolkits to put countries tackling reforms on a more sustainable footing before they fall into crisis. We look forward to the G20 improving the implementation of the Common Framework for debt treatment beyond the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) in a predictable, timely, orderly, and coordinated manner, providing more clarity to debtors and creditors and building on lessons learned. Beyond the Common Framework, debt vulnerabilities in middle-income countries should be addressed by enhancing multilateral coordination. We underline the importance of debt transparency and information sharing in debt restructurings and call on all creditors’ participation in data-sharing exercises. We encourage the Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable (GSDR) to continue its work, fostering a constructive and inclusive dialogue among all parties. We welcome the development of Climate Resilient Debt Clauses (CRDCs) and encourage more creditors to offer CRDCs. We reiterate our firm commitment to evolve and strengthen MDBs to address the most pressing development and global challenges, and welcome further discussions in line with our G20commitment to achieve better, bigger, and more effective MDBs. We welcome the considerable progress that MDBs have already achieved and will continue to support them. We also welcome that the implementation of the G20 MDBs Capital Adequacy Framework (CAF) Review has already secured over USD 200 billion of additional financing for the next ten years and call for further CAF implementation to unlock additional significant financing while safeguarding MDBs excellent credit ratings and preferred creditor status. We are committed to delivering innovative instruments at the MDBs such as hybrid capital and portfolio guarantees, for which the G7 and other donors have already demonstrated their support. Once approved domestically, current G7 commitments to these instruments will make it possible to further boost World Bank lending by around USD 70 billion over the next ten years. We also commend the African Development Bank (AfDB) for its successful first issuance of hybrid capital to market investors. We call on the MDBs to jointly explore ways to better reflect the value of callable capital in their capital adequacy methodologies, including through further discussions with credit rating agencies. We reaffirm the importance of continuing to provide significant concessional support to low-income countries. In this regard, we welcome the successful replenishment of the Asian Development Fund(AsDF14) support a successful International Development Association (IDA21) replenishment and commit to work toward a successful replenishment of the African Development Fund next year(AfDF17). We recognize that contributions from all stakeholders are needed, and we support efforts to broaden the donor base. We strongly support the IMF’s commitment towards the most vulnerable, including through our contributions to the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT). We reiterate the call on all IMF members who are able to contribute, especially those that have not yet done so, to consider providing financial support. We look forward to a comprehensive and timely review of the PRGT, and we are open to discuss all viable options, including the use of internal resources, to ensure the long term financial self-sustainability of the PRGT and to help meet the growing needs of low-income countries. We welcome the interim review of the IMF’s Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST) and its focus on resilience to climate change and pandemics. We support the Alliance for Green Infrastructure in Africa (AGIA), as an innovative financial mechanism of the AfDB in partnership with the African Union, Africa50 and other development partners, aimed at mobilizing blended capital to design and develop a USD 10 billion bankable portfolio of transformative green infrastructure projects in Africa to accelerate the energy transition, bridge the long-standing infrastructure gap and promote climate resilience. As G7, we will collectively contribute up to USD 150 million in grants, concessional and commercial capital to AGIA and we expect to help leverage around up to USD 3 billion of private sector investment in green infrastructure in Africa. We look forward to the seventh edition of the OECD World Forum on Wellbeing to be hosted by Italy in Rome on 4-6 November 2024, focusing, inter alia, on policy issues, such as climate change and AI, from a well-being perspective. 

Trade 
Global threats, particularly Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, including its continuous attempts to disrupt maritime trade in the Black Sea, and the persistent Houthi attacks on commercial vessels transiting the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden, have highlighted the critical need to address vulnerabilities in global supply chains, ports, and trade flows. To meet these challenges, we launched the G7 Working Group on Transport Supply Chains, which will enhance the G7’s ability to strengthen the resilience of transport flows and networks. We remain united in our commitment to the rules-based, free and fair, equitable, and transparent multilateral trading system, with the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core. Despite the lack of more ambitious outcomes, we recognize the results of the 13th WTO Ministerial Conference (MC13).We welcome the decision to maintain the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions until MC14 and we reiterate our support for a permanent prohibition. We are committed to working towards a prompt conclusion of negotiations of the Joint Statement Initiative on E-Commerce. We underscore the need to reform the WTO’s monitoring, deliberative, and negotiating functions and remain committed to conducting discussions with a view to having a fully and well-functioning dispute settlement system accessible to all Members by the end of 2024. We call on relevant countries to refrain from claiming special and differential treatment in the WTO, commensurate with their economic weight and role in the global trading system. We also call for an ambitious and comprehensive agreement on global fisheries subsidies. Multilateral cooperation must be underpinned by fair competition, predictability, and sustainability. In this regard, we reaffirm our attachment to transparency, to coordination, and to the respect of WTO rules in our respective policies. We will step up our efforts towards a global level playing field and reiterate our commitment to keep our economies open and competitive. We will also tackle non-market policies and practices, such as harmful subsidies, including by State Owned Enterprises(SOEs) and forced technology transfers, notably when these policies and practices are used targeting sectors for dominance. We commit to effectively use our trade tools, including new ones, as appropriate, to identify, challenge, and counter these practices, and to promote stronger international rules and norms, together with partners.Acknowledging the important role of trade in addressing global environmental challenges, we will support WTO deliberations that contribute to achieve COP28 commitments, including plurilateral initiatives such as those facilitating and promoting trade in environmental goods, services and technologies, and fighting plastic pollution. We acknowledge that our trade policies, as well as public and private investments in the industries of the future, both at home and around the world, will play a major role in achieving common goals of addressing the climate crisis and accelerating the global clean energy transition. We also acknowledge that further cooperation is necessary to fill the investment gap for the clean energy transition to lower the cost of the energy transition worldwide. In this context, we stress that, in driving the clean energy economy of the future, we will cooperate openly and transparently in a coordinated manner, reflecting our joint commitment not to act at each other’s expense. We will continue to promote inclusive trade recognizing the unique challenges that underrepresented groups, including women and indigenous peoples, face, and their role to ensuring sustainable economic growth. Economic Resilience and Economic Security Building on the progress we made on our strategic coordination since Hiroshima, we reinforce our commitment to promote economic resilience and economic security, in partnership and cooperation within and beyond the G7. In particular, we are building resilient economies and supply chains, ensuring our toolkits to respond to harmful practices are fit for purpose, and safeguarding critical and emerging technology that could be used to threaten international peace and security. Recognizing that economic resilience requires de-risking through diversification and reduction of critical dependencies, including those resulting from overcapacity, we will implement the principles on resilient and reliable supply chains, namely transparency, diversification, security, sustainability, trustworthiness and reliability. We will do so by actively engaging with partners and the private sector, within and beyond the G7, while preserving economic dynamism and openness. We encourage the public and private sectors to make coordinated efforts to strengthen the supply chains resilience of strategic goods, in terms of both supply and demand. This will include seeking to collectively identify critical goods, strategic sectors, and supply chains, for future coordination within the G7 on relevant criteria that take into account not only economic factors, but also factors linked to the principles above We will champion initiatives to increase participation of a broader range of low- and middle-income countries in Africa and elsewhere in global supply chains, while promoting high standards and creating benefits for local workers and communities everywhere. We will also reduce our partners' vulnerability. We reaffirm the need to accelerate coordinated initiatives on critical minerals such as the Partnership for Resilient and Inclusive Supply-chain Enhancement (RISE), the Mineral Security Partnership (MSP) and its MSP Forum. We are more committed than ever to work together to address harmful market distortions and global excess capacity in key sectors resulting from non-market policies and practices, such as pervasive, opaque and harmful industrial subsidies, market distortive practices of SOEs and all forms of forced technology transfers. We acknowledge that such practices not only undermine the free and fair rules-based international economic order, but may also exacerbate strategic dependencies and vulnerabilities, and hinder emerging and developing countries’ sustainable development. Against this background, we will ensure that our toolkits are fit for purpose and strengthen our coordination. We will pursue joint monitoring to assess how non-market policies and practices are producing harmful overcapacities and other spillover effects. We commit to strengthen the exchange of information, including with like-minded countries, and consult on our respective responses, with a view to greater effectiveness, while avoiding unintended negative effects and considering the security of supply chains. We will intensify diplomatic efforts with those contributing to overcapacity to address the issue at its source, while engaging developing countries and emerging markets to collaborate towards a more equitable global trade and investment environment. We will work together with partners to ensure that attempts or threats to weaponize economic dependencies will fail and stand ready to take actions, where necessary, against economic coercion. We will increase our collective assessment, preparedness, deterrence, and response, developing new tools, as appropriate, in line with our respective legal systems and international law. We will address potential, emerging, and ongoing cases, including through the G7 Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion, with partners beyond the G7. We will also support, as appropriate, targeted States, economies, and entities and we task the Platform to actively monitor areas of concern and key threats. We recognize that evolving technologies present opportunities, but also risks. Recognizing that rapid advances are changing the nature of dual-use technology, we will promote efforts to ensure that gaps in our dual-use technology protection ecosystem cannot be exploited. We will ensure that our tools are sufficiently flexible to keep pace with the rapid development of new technologies, while avoiding undue restrictions on international trade and investment. We have a common interest in preventing a narrow set of technological advances that are assessed to be core to enhancing the military and intelligence capabilities of actors who may use these capabilities to undermine international peace and security, from being fueled by our companies’ capital, expertise and knowledge. Today we are taking the following steps:

• We commit to safeguarding the global research ecosystem and preserving open research collaboration. We will strengthen existing multilateral research security and integrity efforts and work to prevent covert and forced transfer of intellectual property, data, and sensitive technology.

• We will increase our capacity to monitor and exchange information on the use of critical minerals as a potential economic coercion threat and will work to prevent risks of supply chain disruptions caused by attempts to weaponize economic dependencies, stemming from monopolization or lack of diversification of existing suppliers.

• We will continue to assess the risks posed by exports of rapidly advancing dual-use technologies, including quantum technologies, and will promote efforts, where necessary and according to our respective legal frameworks, to implement export controls to address risks to international security. We will also work, as appropriate, with our partners to further develop the understanding of how export controls can be implemented quickly and in an assured manner to protect national and international security.

• We will work to ensure the effectiveness of our respective foreign investment screenings, recognizing that some foreign investments may present risks to international peace and security, as well as national security, including by providing access to sensitive technologies, data, and expertise.

• We continue to work to make our economic security toolkit fit to address the risks that our most sensitive technology could be used to threaten international peace and security. In this context, we believe that appropriate measures designed to address risks from outbound investments could be important to complement existing tools of targeted controls on exports and inbound investments. We will continue to engage with and provide clarity to the private sector regarding these common and urgent goals.

• We reaffirm the importance of measures that strengthen data free flow with trust by addressing new risks to international peace and security posed by the interaction of data and advanced technologies, such as AI. We recognize our common interest in ensuring the highest standards for sensitive data protection and security, including genomic data.

• We will work toward ways to safeguard dual-use biotechnology items and equipment, based on evidence of risks associated with bio-convergence. We welcome the OECD Ministerial Council Meeting (MCM) in May, that facilitated our collaboration on economic resilience and economic security among like-minded countries beyond the G7.