I. Introduction
We, the G7 Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom (U.K.) and the United States of America (U.S.), and the High Representative of the European Union, underline our strong sense of unity as the world navigates grave threats to the international system, including Russia's continued war of aggression against Ukraine. We reaffirm our commitment to collective action to address global challenges, including climate change, pollution, loss of biodiversity, health, and food and energy security, and to uphold and reinforce the free and open international order based on the rule of law, respecting the United Nations (UN) Charter. We will continue to work with our partners to promote open, transparent, resilient, and sustainable societies that champion human rights, justice, and dignity, and address the needs of the most vulnerable. We reaffirm our intention to promote human security and continue building a global community that leaves no one behind. We call on all partners to join us in addressing these pressing global challenges and to work together to build a better, more prosperous, and more secure future.

3 China
We recognize the importance of engaging candidly with and expressing our concerns directly to China. We acknowledge the need to work together with China on global challenges as well as areas of common interest, including on climate change, biodiversity, global health security, and gender equality. We reiterate our call for China to act as a responsible member of the international community. We stand prepared to work together to build constructive and stable relations through dialogue and to promote global economic recovery and people-to-people exchanges in a mutually beneficial way. It is in the interest of all countries, including China, to ensure transparent, predictable, and fair business environments. Legitimate business activities and interests of foreign companies must be protected from unfair, anti-competitive, and non-market practices, including through illegitimate technology transfer or data disclosure in exchange for market access. We encourage China to uphold its commitments to act responsibly in cyberspace, including refraining from conducting or supporting cyber-enabled intellectual property theft for commercial gain.

We remind China of the need to uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and abstain from threats, coercion, intimidation, or the use of force. We remain seriously concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas. We strongly oppose any unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion. There is no legal basis for China's expansive maritime claims in the South China Sea, and we oppose China's militarization activities in the region. We emphasize the universal and unified character of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and reaffirm UNCLOS' important role in setting out the legal framework that governs all activities in the oceans and the seas. We reiterate that the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on July 12, 2016, is a significant milestone, which is legally binding upon the parties to those proceeding, and a useful basis for peacefully resolving disputes between the parties.

We reaffirm the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait as an indispensable element in security and prosperity in the international community, and call for the peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues. There is no change in the basic positions of the G7 members on Taiwan, including stated one China policies. We support Taiwan's meaningful participation in international organizations, including in the World Health Assembly and WHO technical meetings, as a member where statehood is not a prerequisite and as an observer or guest where it is. The international community should be able to benefit from the experience of all partners. We continue to raise our concerns with China on reported human rights violations and abuses, including in Xinjiang and Tibet. We reiterate our concerns over the continued erosion of Hong Kong's autonomy rights and freedoms, and call on China to act in accordance with its international commitments and legal obligations, including those enshrined in the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law.

We call on China to act in accordance with its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.

III. Addressing Global Challenges

12 Free and open international order
We are determined to strengthen the free and open international order based on the rule of law, respect for the UN Charter, the sovereignty, and territorial integrity of all states, and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Countries, large and small, benefit from these principles. We are determined to uphold and protect them, and we stand ready to work with all willing partners in this endeavor.

The prohibition of threats or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, in accordance with the provisions of the UN Charter, constitutes the cornerstone of the post-war international system. Yet, territorial ambition is again driving some states to return to rule by force, so we have redoubled our efforts to uphold peace guided by the rule of law. The prohibition on the acquisition of territory resulting from the threat or use of force, reaffirmed in the Friendly Relations Declaration of 1970, should be observed in good faith. We strongly oppose any unilateral attempts to change the peacefully established status of territories by force or coercion anywhere in the world. In this regard, sending regular or irregular forces to unilaterally annex a territory is prohibited.

We emphasize that free and fair trade is key to resilient and sustainable development for all, particularly the most vulnerable. We recognize that free and equitable public access to scientific knowledge is integral to solving global challenges. We also recognize the importance of enhancing international action to detect, deter, and end illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, including through support to developing countries.

We reconfirm the need to accelerate cooperation with our partners to prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism, including terrorist financing and misuse of cyberspace for terrorist purposes. We reiterate the importance of combating transnational organized crime, including crimes related to drug trafficking, small arms and light weapons trafficking, human trafficking, and child abuse, both online and offline. We recognize the significant public health and security challenges posed by synthetic drugs. We will enhance efforts to stop the illicit manufacture and trafficking of these substances and to address the public health consequences of substance use. We remain committed to safe, orderly, and regular migration around the world and will continue to engage in preventing and countering migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons. Our approach will continue to be human rights oriented, survivor-centered, and gender-responsive, and will focus on identifying and protecting those most at-risk, as well as prosecuting the perpetrators. We are committed to working together to strengthen cross-border law enforcement efforts and pursue accountability for corruption. We commit to ensure strong and effective implementation of our existing obligations and commitments to counter corruption, including efforts to fight against foreign bribery, and work to advance our common anti-corruption priorities.

16 Economic resilience and economic security
We express our concern that threats to economic security are increasing and emphasize the urgent need to enhance our coordination and cooperation within and beyond the G7. We express our continued commitment to strengthening economic security, especially for the most vulnerable countries. We emphasize the importance of honoring international norms and obligations to safeguard global economic security and resilience, and reaffirm our commitment to building global economic resilience and responding to harmful practices that undermine the rules-based multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core. We share the view that resilient supply chains should be built in a transparent, diversified, secure, sustainable, trustworthy and reliable manner.

We remain committed to increasing our vigilance and enhancing our cooperation to counter threats that are meant to undermine not only our interests but also global security and stability, including economic coercion. We stress the importance of equipping ourselves with necessary means to counter economic coercion and working together with like-minded partners, including partners with emerging or developing economies, to improve our assessment, preparedness, deterrence, and response to such threats, based on robust diplomatic coordination.

We also emphasize the urgent need to take measures against illegitimate or forced state-led acquisition of critical technologies and intellectual property, especially when this constitutes a risk to the security of target countries. Critical and emerging technologies will have a transformative effect on the way societies function, and their unexpected, malicious, untrustworthy, or improper use has the potential to disrupt national and individual security. We reiterate that the design, development, governance, export, and use of such technologies should be guided by shared democratic values.

We also welcome the G7 Roma-Lyon Group's efforts to bridge discussions on economic security and on counter-terrorism and anti-crime efforts to foster coordination and collaboration with private companies and other non-governmental partners, and to enhance the law enforcement responses, including preventive measures.

17 Development finance and infrastructure
We reaffirm our commitment to narrowing the infrastructure investment gap by delivering financing and other support for sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and quality infrastructure. We will work together to operationalize the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII), including through country-led partnerships and investments in enabling environments for sustainable infrastructure development. We aim to focus investments on areas that drive equitable growth and resilience, including climate and energy, connectivity including ICT and transport, food security, health, and gender.

As the SDGs are reaching their halfway point in 2023, we need to strengthen the efforts to revitalize international cooperation to achieve SDGs in a comprehensive manner, and we are concerned about the increasing debt burdens in many developing countries and crowding out investments in transitioning to greener, more resilient, and inclusive economies, highlighting the importance of fair and open lending practices. We aim to enhance creditor coordination for debt restructuring and to improve the implementation of our existing frameworks through relevant capacity development.

We are determined to promote transparent and fair development finance practices and will work together to address the implementation gap of existing principles such as debt transparency and sustainability, internationally coordinated debt treatments and the respect of the comparability of treatment, fair appraisal, selection and lending practice, and quality infrastructure investment. In this regard, we call on all actors to adhere to internationally recognized rules, standards, and principles, including the G20 Principles for Quality Infrastructure Investment and the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions. We commit to deepening discussions and fostering cooperation among like-minded partners.