The rules-based international order
• The G7 is united by its shared values and commitment to a rules-based international order. That order is being challenged by authoritarianism, serious violations of human rights, exclusion and discrimination, humanitarian and security crises, and the defiance of international law and standards.

• As members of the G7, we are convinced that our societies and the world have reaped remarkable benefits from a global order based on rules and underscore that this system must have at its heart the notions of inclusion, democracy and respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms, diversity, and the rule of law. We understand that our full and meaningful engagement with civil society is an essential pillar of these concepts. We are deeply committed to the values of respect and mutual understanding and are dedicated to the application of equity to every person, including women and children, people with disabilities, Indigenous people and members of other minorities, including religious minorities, who are often marginalized in society. We recognize the key role played by human rights defenders in protecting and promoting human rights and in strengthening the rule of law. We are concerned about resurgent forms of racism, xenophobia and discrimination worldwide, including anti-Semitism and anti-Muslim sentiment. We will work individually and collectively to combat such discrimination and ensure that diversity is recognized and leveraged as a strength for humanity. We also share the view that open, predictable and rules-based trade and investment can contribute to economic growth and job creation. International trade generates prosperity, and we underline the importance of seeking to ensure that all segments of society can take advantage of and benefit from the opportunities that flow from it. In turn, increased trade and investment that is mutually beneficial, sustainable and inclusive—and that facilitates a level playing field—can contribute to reducing poverty and helping the world's most vulnerable.

• We encourage China's responsible participation in the international rules-based system and note its capacity to make important contributions to global public goods and international security, such as peacekeeping. We wish to cooperate with China to resolve the challenges to regional and global peace and prosperity, notably on the Korean Peninsula. We also stress the need for respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We are concerned about the lack of freedom of expression, and about the situation of members of ethnic minorities and some religious groups in China. We are also concerned about the harassment and detention of human rights defenders and their families. We underscore the need to take into consideration the detrimental humanitarian situation in the DPRK when dealing with asylum seekers, including abstaining from forcibly repatriating asylum seekers to the DPRK and allowing safe passage for DPRK asylum seekers transiting through China.