We, the Leaders of the Group of Seven (G7), met in Elmau on 26-28 June 2022, at a critical juncture for the global community, to make progress towards an equitable world. As open democracies adhering to the rule of law, we are driven by shared values and bound by our commitment to the rules-based multilateral order and to universal human rights. As outlined in our Statement on support for Ukraine, standing in unity to support the government and people of Ukraine in their fight for a peaceful, prosperous and democratic future, we will continue to impose severe and immediate economic costs on President Putin's regime for its unjustifiable war of aggression against Ukraine, while stepping up our efforts to counter its adverse and harmful regional and global impacts, including with a view to helping secure global energy and food security as well as stabilising the economic recovery. At a time when the world is threatened by division, we will jointly assume our responsibility and work with partners around the world to find solutions to pressing global challenges such as tackling climate change, and securing a just transition as well as addressing the current and future pandemics and achieving gender equality.

We were joined in Elmau by the Leaders of Argentina, India, Indonesia, Senegal and South Africa, with whom we are united in our commitment to protect and strengthen our democracies, and to jointly address global challenges in close cooperation with other international partners and organisations. The commitments we make today will shape our path towards a sustainable development and inclusive economic recovery, and a prosperous and peaceful future, in line with the Agenda 2030.

Economic Stability and Transformation
Global Economy and Finance
Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine has exacerbated the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic crisis and impeded the recovery that began in the second half of 2021, by dragging down growth, causing significant increases in commodity, energy and food prices, and thereby pushing up inflation to levels not seen for decades in the G7 and beyond, particularly for some emerging markets and developing countries. Against this backdrop, we remain committed to continued coordination to minimise the impact of the war globally, as well as on our own economies and population, including by providing well-targeted support, where necessary. We reaffirm our existing G7 exchange rate commitments.

We continue to strive for a strong, sustainable, balanced, gender-equal, and inclusive global recovery. We remain committed to a stability- and growth-oriented macroeconomic policy mix, which ensures medium-term sustainability of public finances and preserves the resilience of the financial sector. We will maintain and strengthen a safe, resilient, equitable, and rules-based open global economic system. We are united in our strategic response to the structural economic changes made evident by the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's war of aggression.

We remain committed to jointly addressing challenges to long-term growth, including facilitating the net-zero and digital transitions, and the massive investments required. We commit to mobilise high levels of private and public investments, including those in human capital, to unleash the potential for innovation, productivity gains and emission reduction. In doing so, we recognise the importance of diversity and that the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and under-represented groups is crucial for the long-term success of our economies. This includes the need to remove structural barriers to gender equality, including through inclusive and supportive economic and fiscal policy frameworks.

Given the deteriorating and highly challenging debt situations of many developing countries and emerging markets – with more than half of low-income countries in debt distress or at high risk of debt distress – we recognise the urgency of improving the multilateral frameworks for debt restructuring and to address debt vulnerabilities. We underscore our commitment to successfully implementing the G20 Common Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the Debt Service Suspension Initiative. We encourage further efforts to ensure an accelerated implementation of the G20 Common Framework and increased predictability. We call on all G20 partners to join us in this regard. We urge all relevant creditors, including non-Paris Club countries such as China, with large outstanding claims on low-income countries facing debt sustainability challenges, and private creditors in line with the comparability of treatment principle and mutual accountability to contribute constructively to the necessary debt treatments as requested. We reaffirm our commitment to promoting transparency across all debtors and creditors, including private creditors, for improved debt sustainability.

We reiterate our strong political commitment to the timely and effective implementation of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) / G20 Inclusive Framework Two-Pillar Solution, to address the tax challenges arising from globalisation and the digitalisation of the economy with a view to bringing the new rules into effect at the global level. We will continue to provide support to developing countries for the implementation of this historic agreement.

Trade and Supply Chains
We stand united in out commitment to free and fair trade as foundational principles and objectives of the rules-based multilateral system with the World Trade Organisation (WTO) at its core, which proves more important than ever in the current geopolitical environment. It should reflect our shared values, which include openness, transparency, and market-oriented competition, grounded in the rule of law. In a joint effort with others, we have acted over the last months to suspend the Most-Favoured-Nation treatment to products and services from the Russian Federation. We will continue to remove unnecessary trade barriers, including by working against trade-restrictive measures and non-market practices to maintain open and transparent markets, and call on others to do likewise. We renew our commitment to reform the WTO to achieve a fair, predictable, and stable trade environment. Our global trade rulebook must enable economic transformation, sustainable, inclusive, and resilient growth, and be responsive to the needs of global citizens. This includes reforming the WTO's functions of monitoring, negotiation, and the dispute settlement mechanism. We underscore the importance of plurilateral initiatives to negotiating meaningful and relevant outcomes at the WTO, including by fostering creative and practical approaches. To this end, we applaud the outcome of the 12th WTO Ministerial Conference in response to major global issues such as fisheries subsidies, the emerging food security crisis and equitable access to vaccines and the commitment to work to towards necessary reform of the WTO. With a revived multilateral trading system, we look forward to matching this ambitious progress at the 13th WTO Ministerial Conference, by advancing negotiations on E-Commerce and finding a permanent solution for the moratorium on E-Commerce customs duties, closing the gap in the fisheries negotiations, addressing agricultural reform, and making concrete progress on WTO reform. We will further step up our efforts working towards a level playing field through more effective use of existing tools, as well as developing stronger international rules and norms on non-market policies and practices, for example harmful industrial subsidies and trade-distorting actions by state-owned enterprises, notably those that lead to excess capacity. We will support structured discussions at the WTO, on facilitating trade in environmental goods and services, and on how trade-related climate and environmental measures can contribute to meeting our Paris and Glasgow commitments while being consistent with WTO rules and principles.

Trade flows play an important role for the green and just transition and for the diffusion of environmental goods, services, technologies and innovations. Through a mix of binding and non-binding measures, we commit to advancing sustainable supply chains that are net-zero aligned and climate resilient, decouple agricultural production from forest loss and land degradation, use resources sustainably, reduce environmental impact, foster circularity, and promote decent work. We will coordinate to maximise the coherent implementation of and compliance with international standards relating to human rights, environment, and labour across global supply chains. We are committed to tackling child labour, and to ensuring decent work, including fair wages, working closely with the private sector. We are concerned by the use of all forms of forced labour in global supply chains, including state-sponsored forced labour of vulnerable groups and minorities, including in the agricultural, solar, and garment sectors. We agree on the importance of upholding human rights and of international labour standards, including those deriving from International Labour Organisation (ILO) membership, throughout global supply chains and tackling instances of forced labour. We commit to accelerating progress including through our own available domestic means and multilateral institutions with a view to remove all forms of forced labour from global supply chains, including state-sponsored forced labour. We commit to taking measures to strengthen our cooperation and collective efforts towards eradicating the use of all forms of forced labour in global supply chains, including through increased transparency and business risk advisories, and other measures to address forced labour globally.We will align with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs), the ILO Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy (MNE Declaration) and the OECD guidelines relating to responsible business conduct, and call on others to join us in these efforts. We are committed to working towards an international consensus on business and human rights to strengthen compliance with international standards, including through mandatory measures that protect rights-holders, provide for greater multilateral cooperation to address abuses, and support remedy, thus enhancing predictability and certainty for business.

Recent crises have highlighted systemic vulnerabilities to chronic risks and acute market shocks, affecting our supply chains and economic security. We stand firmly for the principles of openness, inclusivity, and competition in a rules-based environment which facilitates sustainable, transparent, diverse, and secure global supply chains through ambitious, values-led trade policy. We recognise that diverse, competitive, and dynamic global supply chains not only guard against monopolisation and economic vulnerability, but also foster interconnectedness, improved welfare, and shared prosperity. Recognising where our markets are vulnerable, we will enhance collaboration, including with industry, to understand vulnerabilities and to strengthen security of critical supplies, particularly in key raw materials and critical minerals. We will focus on promoting market circularity and support diversification by exploring investment in alternative resources, processing capabilities, sustainable practices, and new technologies. We will also coordinate to share insights and best practice on mechanisms for identifying, monitoring and minimising vulnerabilities and logistical bottlenecks in advance of shocks, including cooperative scenario-based stress-testing. To inform this, we welcome the OECD's work on the Security of Supply for Critical Raw Materials. We ask our relevant Ministers, across their areas of expertise to intensify work towards building responsible, sustainable, and transparent critical minerals supply chains, and establishing a forward strategy via international cooperation‚ policy, and financial tools. This should include addressing export restrictions and trade barriers at the international level, and consider all parts of critical minerals supply chains, including processing, refining and the circular economy.

More generally, and taking stock of our existing cooperation on economic security in the face of external shocks and wider risks, we commit to ongoing strategic coordination as the G7 on this matter. We will increase our vigilance to threats, including economic coercion, that are meant to undermine global security and stability. To this end, we will pursue enhanced cooperation and explore mechanisms to improve assessment, preparedness, deterrence, and response to such risks, drawing upon best practice to address exposure both across and beyond the G7.

Foreign and Security Policy
We reiterate the importance of maintaining a free and open Indo Pacific, which is inclusive and based on the rule of law. We re-emphasise our support for ASEAN unity and centrality and commit to explore concrete cooperation in line with the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. We remain seriously concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas. We strongly oppose any unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion that increase tensions. We emphasise the universal and unified character of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), and reaffirm UNCLOS's important role in setting out the legal framework that governs all activities in the ocean and the seas. We stress that there is no legal basis for China's expansive maritime claims in the South China Sea. In this regard, we urge China to fully comply with the arbitral award of 12 July 2016 and to respect navigational rights and freedoms enshrined in UNCLOS. We urge all parties to resolve disputes over maritime claims through peaceful means consistent with international law and support using the dispute settlement mechanisms established by UNCLOS. We underscore the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait and encourage a peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues.

In the context of our cooperation with the largest economies, including in the framework of the G20, it is necessary to cooperate with China on shared global challenges, in particular addressing climate change and biodiversity loss and other relevant multilateral issues. We continue to call on China to uphold its obligations under international law and to contribute to international security. We remind China of the need to uphold the principle of the UN Charter on peaceful settlement of disputes and to abstain from threats, coercion, intimidation measures or use of force.

As Russia is waging its unjustifiable, unprovoked and illegal war against Ukraine, we call on China to press Russia to immediately comply with the legally binding order of the International Court of Justice of 16 March 2022 and to abide by the relevant resolutions of the UN General Assembly and stop its military aggression – and immediately and unconditionally withdraw its troops from Ukraine.

We call on China to honour its commitments made in the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, which enshrine rights, freedoms and a high degree of autonomy for Hong Kong.

We remain committed to upholding fair and transparent competition in the global economy and strengthening international rules in this regard. With regard to China's role in the global economy, we are continuing to consult on collective approaches, also beyond the G7, to challenges posed by non-market policies and practices which distort the global economy. We will build a shared understanding of China's non-transparent and market-distorting interventions and other forms of economic and industrial directives. We will then work together to develop coordinated action to ensure a level playing field for our businesses and workers, to foster diversification and resilience to economic coercion, and to reduce strategic dependencies.

We are gravely concerned about the human rights situation in China. We will continue to promote universal values, including by calling on China to respect universal human rights and fundamental freedoms, including in Tibet and in Xinjiang where forced labour is of major concern to us.

We continue to condemn in the strongest terms the military coup in Myanmar and express deep concern about the political, humanitarian and human rights situation. We call on the military regime immediately to end the use of violence, free all political prisoners and those arbitrarily detained and return the country to a democratic path. We will continue to support all efforts by ASEAN and the implementation of ASEAN's Five-Point Consensus in all its dimensions. We also remain fully supportive of all efforts by the United Nations, and encourage strong coordination between the ASEAN Special Envoy and the Special Envoy of the United Nations Secretary-General on Myanmar.

We strongly condemn the continued, unlawful testing of ballistic missiles by the DPRK, including the Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) launches conducted on 24 March and 25 May 2022. We demand that the DPRK abandon its unlawful weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner in accordance with the UN Security Council resolutions. We further call on all states to fully and effectively implement these resolutions, and to remain vigilant for sanctions evading activity. We urge the DPRK to engage in diplomacy and to resume dialogue towards complete denuclearisation. We reiterate the urgent need for the DPRK to improve the humanitarian and human rights situation, address its COVID situation effectively, facilitate access for international humanitarian organisations, and resolve the abductions issue immediately.

We reiterate our clear commitment that Iran must never develop a nuclear weapon. We regret that, despite intense diplomatic efforts to restore full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPoA), Iran has not yet seized the opportunity to conclude a deal. The G7 commits to working together, and with other international partners, to address the threat posed to international security by Iran's nuclear escalation. A diplomatic solution remains the best way to restrict Iran's nuclear programme. We urge Iran to cooperate substantively with the IAEA and to act on an urgent basis to fulfill its legal obligations by providing technically credible information that the Agency requires to clarify and resolve outstanding issues related to nuclear safeguards, as called upon with an overwhelming majority by the resolution adopted by the IAEA Board of Governors on 8 June.

We strongly condemn Iran's continued destabilising activity in the region. We call upon Iran to stop all ballistic missile activities and proliferation inconsistent with UNSCR 2231 and other UNSC resolutions. Iran's threats to maritime security further impair regional stability. We welcome regional initiatives to improve bilateral relations between partners in the region and call on Iran to contribute actively and constructively to fostering regional peace and security in the Middle East. We reiterate our shared profound concern over the continued human rights violations and abuses in Iran, including arbitrary arrest and detention, and condemn Iran's increased use of capital punishment. We call on Iran to end arbitrary arrest and detention of foreign and dual nationals for the purposes of political leverage. We continue to support international efforts to hold Iran to account for the unlawful shooting-down of Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752.

We express our deep concern about the political situation and the deterioration of the humanitarian and economic situation in Afghanistan since the Taliban take-over. We reassure the people of Afghanistan of our principled support and continued humanitarian assistance and assistance to cover basic human needs, based on the respect for humanitarian principles and fundamental human rights, including women's rights. We also reassure the people of Afghanistan the provision of swift relief, in coordination with the UN, to the communities struck by the recent earthquake. We are united in our strong condemnation of the ongoing violence with recurring terrorist attacks particularly targeting members of ethnic and religious minority groups. We call upon the Taliban to respect human rights, especially the rights of women and girls and members of minority groups, including the right to education for all without discrimination. We urge the Taliban to take significant steps in support of creating inclusive and representative governance of Afghanistan, and to ensure safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access, combat terrorism in line with their relevant commitments including the Doha agreement, and allow safe passage for all Afghans in need of protection travelling abroad. The type and scope of our engagement that goes beyond humanitarian assistance and assistance to cover basic needs are to be informed by the concrete achievements of the Taliban to meet these expectations widely shared by the international community.

We reaffirm our strong commitment to the UN-facilitated, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process and the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We recall that free and fair presidential and parliamentary elections need to be held as soon as possible, leading to a representative and unified government. We underline the continuing need to observe and implement in full the 23 October 2020 ceasefire agreement, including the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries, such as the Wagner Group. Progress must be made on justice and accountability for human rights abuses, including conflict-related sexual violence and regarding refugees and migrants. We urge the full resumption of oil production in Libya and call upon all actors to refrain from using it as an instrument of political confrontation.

We reiterate that there is no alternative to an inclusive political solution on the basis of UN Security Council Resolution 2254 in Syria, and therefore we reaffirm our full support to the UN Special Envoy Pedersen. We will not normalise relations with the Assad regime until we witness enduring and meaningful progress in the UN-facilitated political process. We urge continued humanitarian and development support for Syrian refugees and host countries, until Syrians can voluntarily return home with safety and dignity according to UN standards. We also strongly support the re-authorisation and expansion of cross-border humanitarian assistance by the UN Security Council in July. Moreover, we urge the regime to comply with its international obligations. We remain firmly committed to pursue accountability for the Syrian regime's use of chemical weapons, human rights violations and abuses and other violations of international law, including humanitarian law. We welcome ongoing efforts by national jurisdictions to prosecute crimes committed in Syria, and underscore the urgent need for progress on the fate and whereabouts of tens of thousands forcibly disappeared or arbitrarily detained Syrians and recall that accountability and justice for victims is essential for a stable, peaceful Syria. We underline the importance of maintaining the ceasefire in northern Syria, which ensures collective efforts to fight Daesh can continue and if broken, risks exacerbating an already dire humanitarian situation including through the further displacement of people. We reaffirm our shared commitment to work towards a sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis.

We are encouraged by recent developments in Yemen and welcome the two-month extension of the truce, brokered by the United Nations. We urge all parties to implement the associated confidence building measures, especially the opening of roads in and around Taiz. We call on the parties to the conflict to make use of the extension to engage in constructive talks under the leadership of the United Nations, to convert this truce into a lasting ceasefire and to ultimately reach a durable peace.

We are deeply concerned by the continuing deterioration of the political and security situation in the Sahel, the threat of terrorism in the Gulf of Guinea and littoral states, continuing attacks against civilian populations, as well as the worsening food and humanitarian crisis. The intervention of the Wagner Group in Mali and atrocities linked to their presence are of great concern and we call for accountability of those responsible for violations or abuses. We urge all actors to respect human rights and international humanitarian law. We support the efforts of the Economic Community of West African States in response to the events in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea and the African Union in Chad. We call for free and fair elections in order to allow for a durable return to constitutional rule. We recognise the efforts in Niger and Mauritania to consolidate democratic institutions strengthen the rule of law and good governance including migration governance and foster stabilisation. We reiterate our strong commitment to support the populations of the Sahel countries, help stabilise the region and tackle the root causes of terrorism and instability as outlined within the Sahel Coalition.

The G7 remains concerned about peace, security, and humanitarian challenges in the Horn of Africa. Democratic achievements, economic reforms, and above all the well-being of the populations in the region are threatened by political instability, weak governance, armed conflicts, militias and terrorist groups as well as by the effects of climate change and natural disasters. Country health systems continue to be stressed by the COVID-19 pandemic which has negative implications for overall health service delivery as well as health capacity building efforts. Human rights violations and abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence, and a lack of accountability remain major concerns.

Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine has compounded food insecurity worldwide, especially in the Horn of Africa, where worsening drought is affecting over 18 million people in Ethiopia, Somalia and Kenya. We emphasise our commitment to work with countries and institutions in the region to foster peaceful and sustainable development in the Horn of Africa, and will support as a priority effort to tackle one of the worst droughts in its history. We welcome the peaceful conclusion of the electoral process in Somalia and reiterate our commitment to work alongside the African Union and Somali authorities to counter violent extremism and other significant challenges. We are also encouraged by the humanitarian truce in Ethiopia and call on all parties to begin talks toward a durable ceasefire and a political solution to the crisis that lays the foundation for durable peace. Safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access has to continue. It is essential to address human rights issues and provide transparent accountability. In Sudan, a swift return to a civilian-led government and democratic transition process is urgently needed. We fully support the tripartite efforts by UNITAMS, AU and IGAD and call on all stakeholders to engage actively in a constructive dialogue.

In view of the 10th Review Conference of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in August 2022, we are united in our resolve to comprehensively strengthen the NPT, promote its universalisation, re-inforce the importance of commitments made at past Review Conferences and advance implementation of the Treaty across all three of its mutually reinforcing pillars. We underline the authority and primacy of the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear technology. The G7 reaffirms its commitment to the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons with undiminished security for all, achieved through concrete, practical, and purposeful steps. The overall decline in global nuclear arsenals must be sustained and not reversed. We welcome the Joint Statement of the Leaders of the Five Nuclear-Weapon States on Preventing Nuclear War and Avoiding Arms Races of 3 January 2022, including the important affirmation that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. However, we condemn Russia's provocative statements which signal the threat of use of nuclear weapons. This undermines the credibility of Russia's commitment to the Joint Statement. Any use of chemical, biological or nuclear weapons or related materials by Russia in Ukraine would be met with severe consequences.

The Russian war against Ukraine and other conflicts have pushed the number of people worldwide forced to flee war, violence, human rights violations and persecution to a record high of 100 million, evidencing the urgent need to address the root causes of refugee movements and internal displacement, as well as to provide safe, dignified, and sustainable solutions. We reaffirm our commitment to protecting refugees, supporting forcibly displaced persons and supporting host countries and communities, ensuring the full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms of refugees, and addressing the particular needs of women and children in conflict, crisis, and displacement. Recalling the commitment of the Global Compact on Refugees to share responsibility more equitably, we will continue to promote international solidarity with refugees and host countries, including by expanding resettlement programmes. We also call upon the international community to follow suit and increase their protection of refugees and support to forcibly displaced persons and for host countries, in an effort towards global responsibility-sharing. We affirm the importance of, combating human trafficking and related illicit financil flows, smuggling of migrants, and countering related disinformation.

Russia's devastating war in Ukraine, the wholesale rollback of women's and girls' rights in Afghanistan since the forceful take-over of power by the Taliban, and the impact of war, conflict, and forced displacement worldwide clearly demonstrate that women, girls, and those most vulnerable based on gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability are disproportionately affected, and yet at the same time severely underrepresented in decision making roles. We will further promote and implement the Women, Peace and Security Agenda. We will improve documentation and accountability for human rights violations and abuses, such as sexual and gender-based violence, including in conflict situations. We reiterate the need to strengthen the implementation of international architecture to prevent and respond to conflict related sexual violence, and will support the empowerment of women and girls as critical agents for conflict prevention, crisis management, conflict resolution, relief and recovery, and long-term peacebuilding.