We, the G7 Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, and the High Representative of the European Union, are more united than ever in the pursuit of international peace, security, and prosperity. In this Foreign Ministers' Meeting, we further enhance our cooperation to collectively respond to recent global and regional issues, building on our commitments by our leaders at the G7 Hiroshima Summit. We remain steadfast in upholding and strengthening the free and open international order based on the rule of law, respecting the United Nations (UN) Charter. We reiterate our strong opposition to any unilateral attempts to change the peacefully established status of territories by force or coercion anywhere in the world. Such attempts undermine the rule of law, which protects all nations, especially the vulnerable, as well as global security and human dignity. We also commit to further building international solidarity beyond the G7 to advance global economic development and address broader global challenges, such as climate change, nuclear disarmament, economic resilience and economic security, and gender equality including the Women, Peace and Security agenda. We remain deeply concerned about foreign interference, information manipulation, and other hostile actions designed to undermine our democracies. We call on all countries to respect their obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. We underscore the need to advance all of the Sustainable Development Goals to promote peace and prosperity for people and the planet, as reflected at the 2023 SDG Summit. We also take note of the Summit for a New Global Financing Pact. Our determination to meet our commitments on these issues is unwavering, and we will continue strengthening them towards the next year under the Italian Presidency.

4. China
We stand prepared to build constructive and stable relations with China, recognizing the importance of engaging candidly and expressing our concerns directly to China. We act in our national interests. We acknowledge the need to work together with China on global challenges as well as areas of common interest, and call on China to engage with us on these issues. Our policy approaches are not designed to harm China nor do we seek to thwart China's economic progress and development. We are not decoupling or turning inwards. At the same time, we recognize that economic resilience requires de-risking and diversifying. With a view to enabling sustainable economic relations with China, and strengthening the international trading system, we will continue to push for a level playing field for our workers and companies. We will seek to address the challenges posed by China's non-market policies and practices, which distort the global economy. We will counter malign practices, such as illegitimate technology transfer or data disclosure. We will foster resilience to economic coercion. We also recognize the necessity of protecting certain advanced technologies that could be used to threaten our national security without unduly limiting trade and investment. We call on China to act as a responsible member of the international community. In this regard, we welcome China's participation in the Ukraine-led peace process. We further call on China not to assist Russia in its war against Ukraine, to press Russia to stop its military aggression, and to support a just and lasting peace in Ukraine.

We underscore that China has a responsibility to uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter in their entirety. We remain seriously concerned about the situation in the East and South China Seas, strongly opposing any unilateral attempts to change the status quo by force or coercion. We reemphasize the universal and unified character of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and reaffirm UNCLOS's important role in setting out the legal framework that governs all activities in the oceans and the seas. We reiterate that the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on July 12, 2016, is a significant milestone, which is legally binding upon the parties to those proceedings, and a useful basis for peacefully resolving disputes between the parties.

We reaffirm the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait as indispensable to security and prosperity in the international community and call for the peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues. There is no change in the basic position of the G7 members on Taiwan, including stated one China policies. We reiterate our support for Taiwan's meaningful participation in international organizations, including in the World Health Assembly and WHO technical meetings. We also remain concerned about the human rights situation in China, including in Xinjiang and Tibet. We further call on China to uphold its commitments under the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, which enshrine rights and freedoms and a high degree of autonomy for Hong Kong. We call on China to act in accordance with its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and not to conduct interference activities, aimed at undermining the security and safety of our communities, the integrity of our democratic institutions, and our economic prosperity.