G8 AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GROWTH AND STABILITY
1. We have agreed on a policy agenda to promote a smooth adjustment of global imbalances which should take place in the context of sustained robust global economic growth. We have taken stock of the progress made to date and discussed further challenges lying ahead. Our agenda builds on discussions at the IMF and other international fora. Open markets and competition are crucial elements, as are our efforts to promote freedom of investment and the dynamics of innovation described hereafter.

2. We note that the world economy is in good condition and economic developments are now more conducive to an adjustment than in the past, not least because we have made progress in implementing our joint strategy. However, further efforts will be required to better rebalance global demand. Global imbalances took a long time to build. Likewise, their unwinding is likely to be a gradual process, entailing a medium-term rebalancing of demand growth across countries.

3. The economic environment has developed in a direction which favours the adjustment of global imbalances. Growth is now more balanced across regions, as it has moderated to a more sustainable pace in the US, while domestic demand has strengthened in Europe and remains supported by robust investment in Japan. We have made progress in implementing our joint policy strategy:

• The United States has lent support to national savings by quickly and substantially reducing the federal budget deficit.

• In Canada, domestic demand has been strong, supported by robust employment growth. Governments have significant ongoing budget surpluses.

• In Europe, domestic demand has strengthened and the recent growth performance reflects prudent macroeconomic policies and a pay-off from structural reforms, including an improved labour market.

• In Japan, as strenuous structural reform efforts continue, the upswing has proceeded and is becoming broader based. Fiscal consolidation is progressing, which is indispensable to reinforce confidence in the economy and to ensure sustainable, solid growth.

• Russia has been enjoying seven consecutive years of robust economic growth based on strong domestic consumption, a take-off in investment and a disciplined macroeconomic and financial management.

4. Outside of our group, a number of countries in emerging Asia have taken first steps on the road towards a more flexible exchange rate regime and a strengthening of the financial sector, a move which would support this adjustment. Oil producing countries have increased investment in oil production capacity and many have made prudent use of their additional export revenues to promote the diversification of their economies and employment. Their import growth has accelerated substantially.

5. Global imbalances have been showing some signs of stabilisation more recently and deficits have been relatively easily financed. An orderly adjustment, which is in the interest of the world economy, will take time. We are committed to implementing domestic policies to promote this. They are first and foremost in each of our own best interests:

• The United States is targeting the elimination of its federal budget deficit by 2012. Policies also have been proposed to strengthen long-term fiscal sustainability through entitlement and health care reform, tax incentives to promote private saving, and proposals have been made to boost the use of alternative fuels and enhance energy efficiency. The United States will continue to follow pro-growth economic policies.

• Europe will continue its structural reform efforts guided by the Lisbon strategy to promote growth and employment.

• Japan will continue its effort to enhance growth potential by implementing the comprehensive program for boosting productivity growth announced in this April. Fiscal reform will be steadily implemented to meet the targets committed by the government, namely achieving surplus in the primary balance of the combined central and local governments by 2011 as a first step for reducing the debt-toGDP ratio in a stable manner by the mid-2010s.

• Russia is committed to pursue a sound macroeconomic policy framework and prudent financial policies along with a range of structural reforms facilitating its transition to self-sustaining, investmentand innovation-led growth.

• Canada is committed to continuing to reduce government debt and has set an objective of eliminating total government net debt in a generation. Canada is also committed to continuing to lower taxes on persons and business and to reducing regulatory burdens, as well as promoting knowledge creation and investing in infrastructure.

6. We encourage a contribution from the emerging market countries towards reducing imbalances. Continued reforms to rebalance growth towards domestic demand, thus enhancing its sustainability, are key to reducing imbalances while sustaining the robust global expansion. In emerging economies with large and growing current account surpluses, it is crucial that their effective exchange rates move so that necessary adjustments will occur. Oil-producing countries should continue accelerating investment in capacity and economic diversification.

FREEDOM OF INVESTMENT, INVESTMENT ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
9. We recognize that the increase of cross-border direct investment is a major factor shaping the world’s economy. Provided appropriate framework conditions are in place, such inflows make a major positive contribution to economic growth, social and environmental development. We note four areas for action in order to maximize the benefits from cross-border investment:

• reinforcing our G8 commitment to the freedom of investment,

• promoting an open investment environment in industrialised countries and emerging economies,

• enabling greater benefits from and sustainability of foreign direct investments (FDI) for developing countries,

• promoting and strengthening corporate and other forms of social responsibility.

Freedom of investment

10. We will work together to strengthen open and transparent investment regimes and to fight against tendencies to restrict them. Erecting barriers and supporting protectionism would result in a loss of prosperity. We therefore agree on the central role of free and open markets for the world economy, respecting sustainability concerns, and the need to maintain open markets to facilitate global capital movements. We reaffirm that freedom of investment is a crucial pillar of economic growth, prosperity and employment. We call on all developed countries, major emerging economies and others to critically assess their investment policies, the potential costs incurred from unnecessarily restrictive or arbitrary policies and the economic benefits of open investment regimes.

11. Against this background we remain committed to minimize any national restrictions on foreign investment. Such restrictions should apply to very limited cases which primarily concern national security. The general principles to be followed in such cases are non-discrimination, transparency and predictability. In any case, restrictive measures should not exceed the necessary scope, intensity and duration. Applicable treaties relating to investment remain unaffected. We encourage the OECD to continue its work on these issues, especially by identifying best practices and by further developing general principles. We will work with the OECD and other fora to develop further our common understanding of transparency principles for market-driven cross border investment of both private and state-owned enterprises.

The global investment environment

12. Emerging economies benefit considerably from inward FDI while acting increasingly as countries of origin of FDI. We see the need and the opportunity to work towards a level playing field for all investors. Companies from G8 countries investing in emerging economies expect to find the same open investment environment as companies from such countries investing in G8 countries. Openness to investment is beneficial for all parties involved.

13. We underscore that market-driven technology transfer is an important globalisation catalyst. Governments have a role in establishing and maintaining the appropriate institutions and legal regulatory policy frameworks necessary to enable technology flows on a commercial basis and assuring the respect of intellectual property rights.

14. Open and transparent procurement markets are an important precondition for crossborder investments. We invite all our partners, in particular the major emerging economies, to create a level playing field for national and foreign tenderers. This may include considerations to join the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement (GPA).

15. We call on the emerging economies to adopt the OECD Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises. We invite the major emerging economies to participate in a structured High Level Dialogue on investment conditions in industrialised countries and emerging economies as part of the Heiligendamm Process. A stocktaking exercise, an examination of best practices and the implementation of peer review mechanisms to promote an open, efficient investment environment that aims to remove remaining barriers to investment should be a good start. We ask the OECD to provide a platform for such a dialogue.

Investment in developing countries

16. Unlike industrialized and emerging economies, many less advanced developing countries often reap only inadequate benefits from FDI. In shared responsibility with our developing country partners we want to enable quality FDI inflows to grow, inflows that help local infrastructure facilitate the operations of national and foreign investors that improve the skills of the local labour force and the advantages of transfers of management skills and technology that accrue from FDI increase, and that support the ability of domestic firms to supply inputs to foreign-invested companies or strengthen international value chains. Economic, social and environmental aspects of sustainability are crucial in order to maximize the FDI benefits for all developing countries, including least developed countries.

17. We support the regional and multilateral development banks (MDBs), including the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), in addressing the problem of poor business environments in their borrowing members and urge them to integrate efforts to address these impediments to investment in their country strategies and budgets.

18. We support the initiative of G8 Finance Ministers to foster the development of deeper, more liquid local bond markets in emerging economies. This can make an important contribution to reducing the vulnerability of individual countries to crises and to enhancing the financial stability of emerging countries as a whole.

19. We support the OECD Policy Framework for Investment and UNCTAD Investment Policy Reviews as valuable mechanisms in defining a shared understanding of healthy investment climates in emerging economies and developing countries. The OECD Policy Framework for Investment could be translated into national practices and development strategies, especially for countries under the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) and Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) framework. We invite the OECD, UNCTAD and other organisations such as the World Bank to consider providing the necessary support for this purpose.

20. We invite UNCTAD and the OECD to jointly engage industrialized countries, emerging economies and developing countries in the development of best practices for creating an institutional environment conducive to increased foreign investment and sustainable development. Such a comprehensive process should be closely connected with the twelfth UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD XII) planned for 20th to 25th April 2008 in Accra (Ghana).

PROMOTING INNOVATION – PROTECTING INNOVATION
30. Science, research and innovation today more than ever form the basis of economic growth and prosperity. Political and economic strategies to foster innovation are therefore key elements for the future development of industrialised countries, emerging economies and developing countries alike. We will undertake to bring forward an international economic and political environment that promotes and protects innovation.

Innovation for Sustainable Growth

31. Forward looking innovation policy is geared towards promoting the research community and towards translating ideas, the product of the research process, into innovative products and services. Whereas the promotion of research involves education and higher-education policy, economic policy can play a crucial role in promoting the translation of research into innovative products and in fostering an innovation-friendly business environment. Both tasks benefit from the engagement of national governments. International cooperation and exchanges can supply a substantial impetus in the shaping of national policy. Cooperation between advanced and developing countries in research activities in the field of science and technology should also be strengthened.

32. Because we strive to provide scientific and technical leadership we also recognize our responsibility for a long-term oriented research initiative that will focus on concentration of scientific research and improved technological capacity in order to be able to react most effectively to future global challenges. We recognize the increasing significance of many emerging economies in science and research and invite them to actively participate in this process by reinforcing already existing cooperative efforts in the OECD building also on the results of ongoing work promoted inter alia by the relevant UN bodies.

33. In this respect we support the engagement of the OECD to work on proposals for topical international collaborative efforts. Based on the work of the Global Science Forum (GSF), we recognize the value that the GSF will bring as the moderator of this process. We also support the sharing of information among the G8 and emerging economies on national research endeavours in order to identify priorities that could be enhanced by collaborative research efforts, joint initiatives and programmes on areas of common interest. Possible areas of cooperation could be sustainable use of water and land and research in the field of energy efficiency as well as the promotion of environmentally-related innovations both in the public and in the business sector. We will work together to achieve more effective coordination and cooperation in our research efforts in these fields.

Intellectual Property Protection as the Backbone of Innovation

34. A fully functioning intellectual property system is an essential factor for the sustainable development of the global economy through promoting innovation. We recognize the importance of streamlining and harmonizing the international patent system in order to improve the acquisition and protection of patent rights world-wide.

35. The benefits of innovation for economic growth and development are increasingly threatened by infringements of intellectual property rights worldwide. We therefore strongly reaffirm our commitment to combat piracy and counterfeiting. Trade in pirated and counterfeit goods threatens health, safety and security of consumers worldwide, particularly in poorer countries. In this regard we welcome work on the WHO initiative to implement the International Medicinal Products Anti-Counterfeit Taskforce (IMPACT). Our common efforts in this combat are therefore in the interest of all countries at all levels of development.

36. We commit to strengthen cooperation in this critical area among the G8 and other countries, particularly the major emerging economies, as well as competent international organizations, notably the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), WTO, the World Customs Organization (WCO), Interpol, the World Health Organization (WHO), the OECD, APEC, and the Council of Europe. We invite these organizations to reinforce their action in this field.

37. We welcome the joint Declaration of the business communities of all G8 countries on “Strategies of G8 Industry and Business to Promote Intellectual Property Protection and to Prevent Counterfeiting and Piracy” which highlights actions companies are taking to secure their intellectual property rights at home and abroad and to keep their global supply chains free of pirated and counterfeit goods – from producers and distributors, retailers and merchandisers. Industry and business have an essential role to play in protecting innovation, and we will engage our respective private sectors on effective solutions with regard to both the supply and the demand side of piracy and counterfeiting. We also welcome educational campaigns with the help of business communities in our countries directed at raising awareness of consumers with regards to the negative effects of counterfeiting and piracy.

38. In light of the urgency to implement concrete measures which will improve and deepen cooperation among G8 partners and deliver real enforcement results, we decide to undertake the following:

(a) We endorse the Guidelines for Customs and Border Enforcement Cooperation designed to strengthen cooperation and coordination among our national customs and law enforcement administrations. In this context we especially welcome the development of an effective information exchange system – where appropriate in close association with the WCO which will lead to improved cooperation among the relevant enforcement authorities worldwide.

(b) We endorse new Guidelines for Technical Assistance on intellectual property rights protection to interested developing countries, as well as a mechanism to better coordinate and leverage existing G8 assistance to such countries with a view to building the capacity necessary to combat trade in counterfeited and pirated goods to strengthen intellectual property enforcement. In partnership with certain developing countries we agree to launch technical assistance pilot plans with a view to building the capacity necessary to combat trade in counterfeited and pirated goods to strengthen intellectual property enforcement. The progress on these pilot plans will be reviewed by the G8 in 2008.

(c) We endorse the recommendations aimed at improving G8 member countries’ cooperative actions to combat serious and organized intellectual property rights crimes and the further work on their basis to facilitate structured international cooperation regarding the investigation and prosecution of those crimes.

(d) While appreciating the information contained in the OECD report estimating the economic impacts of counterfeiting and piracy on national economies and right holders, as well as public health and safety, we will encourage the OECD to work with member states to further identify and target in its report specific areas for concrete actions.

(e) We recognize the need for continued study by national experts of the possibilities of strengthening the international legal framework pertaining to IPR enforcement.

(f) We consider the establishment of an IPR Task Force focusing on anti-counterfeiting and piracy to look together at how best to improve the working of the international IPR protection and enforcement, and produce recommendations for action including improved peer review. The issue will also be considered in the Heiligendamm Process.

A New Dialogue on Innovation and Intellectual Property Protection

39. Lively interaction between science and business, strong protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, and the combination of market-based entrepreneurship and science-based research are increasingly decisive factors in promoting economic growth and development around the world. We invite the major emerging economies to a follow up process using the OECD as a platform with the aim of establishing a new international dialogue on innovation and intellectual property protection as part of the Heiligendamm Process. Such a dialogue will provide a forum for the positive exchange on topics critical for growth of successful knowledge economies and the promotion of an innovation-friendly business environment also taking into account the needs of small and medium sized enterprises, including: (a) the crucial role and economic value of intellectual property protection and implementation as a central framework condition for the development of a future-oriented economy based on technological progress and innovation; (b) effective market incentives for innovation and the diffusion of knowledge at the national level taking into account recent developments in technology markets; and (c) the crucial importance of efficient innovation value chains that promote business commercialization of patented research results and exploit licensing as a major driver for the international transfer of technology. The dialogue could furthermore ascertain measures the industrialized countries and major emerging economies can take to achieve fully effective implementation and protection of intellectual property rights within their own territory. Fully respecting the mandate, function and role of the competent multilateral organizations, in particular the WTO and the WIPO, participants in the dialogue may also discuss initiatives aimed at strengthening intellectual property rights protection which should then be addressed in the appropriate international fora. The G8 Summit 2009 will take stock of the progress made by that date.

THE “HEILIGENDAMM PROCESS” WITH MAJOR EMERGING ECONOMIES – HIGH LEVEL DIALOGUE BETWEEN G8 MEMBER COUNTRIES
AND BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA, MEXICO AND SOUTH AFRICA

94. At the Heiligendamm Summit we discussed with the leaders of Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South Africa the major challenges that have arisen in the world economy. Neither the G8 countries nor major emerging economies will be able to cope with these challenges individually. Against the background of our respective responsibilities, common solutions need to be developed. Both the G8 countries and the major emerging economies have the chance to define a new partnership responding to these world economic challenges.

95. Building on our discussions, we decided to launch a new form of specific cooperation with major emerging economies in order to discuss substantive topics in a comprehensive follow-up process with the aim of reaching tangible results in two years.

96. We will initiate a new form of a topic-driven Dialogue in a structured manner based on this new partnership. We agreed to address four issues:

• Promoting and protecting innovation,

• Enhancing freedom of investment through an open investment environment including strengthening corporate social responsibility principles,

• Defining common responsibilities for development with special regard to Africa,

• Sharing knowledge for improving energy efficiency and technology cooperation with the aim to contribute to reducing CO2-emissions, consistent with the Gleneagles Dialogue on Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable Development, and the St. Petersburg Plan of Action on Global Energy Security,

97. We ask the OECD to provide a platform for this new dialogue process, with the IEA being the relevant organisation in the field of energy efficiency. The dialogue process will begin in the second half of 2007. The G8 Summit in Japan in 2008 will receive an interim report on the progress made and at the G8 Summit in Italy in 2009 a final report on the outcomes of the Dialogue Process will be presented.