1. Chief of Mission Priorities As Secretary Blinken has made clear, “China is the only country with both the intent to reshape the international order and, increasingly, the economic, diplomatic, military, and technological power to do it. Beijing’s vision would move us away from the universal values that have sustained so much of the world’s progress over the past 75 years.” The October 2022 U.S. National Security Strategy issued by the White House established three major aims of U.S. policy toward China: “1) Invest: to invest in the foundations of our strength at home – our competitiveness, our innovation, our resilience, our democracy, 2) Align: to align our efforts with our network of allies and partners, acting with common purpose and in common cause, and 3) Compete: to compete responsibly with the PRC to defend our interests and build our vision for the future.” U.S. Mission China diplomats at our Embassy in Beijing and our consulates in Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang, and Wuhan will advance and defend America’s many interests in our complex and consequential relationship with the People’s Republic of China (PRC). The 47 federal agencies and sub-agencies comprising our Mission will provide the substantive expertise, commitment, judgment, diplomatic effectiveness, and patriotism to compete with the PRC across a broad front of issues and to engage and compete when that is in our interest. We will protect American citizens’ welfare and economic security, including by opposing and resolving wrongful and arbitrary detentions of Americans held unjustly in PRC prisons and exit bans that prevent more than 40 of our citizens from leaving China. We will advance the prosperity of the millions of Americans whose livelihoods are affected by PRC economic policies. Along with our partners and allies, we will push back on the PRC’s harmful practices, such as the use of forced labor, and the channeling of state-directed investment in ways that threaten our economic welfare and national security. In particular, we will vigorously carry out policies to stop PRC entities from misusing advanced technologies obtained from the United States to undermine our national security and the welfare of our companies and workers.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 2 of 29We will defend democracy and freedom of expression, freedom of the press, religion, and the rule of law. We will defend the global order put in place following the Second World War, human rights, and human dignity, including addressing violations of human rights in Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong. We will work with allies, partners, and friends who share our goals to shape the PRC’s choices constructively and press the PRC to respect international law and norms. In the face of increasing pressure and restrictions on people-to-people engagement, the Mission will advocate open channels for American students, scholars, diplomats, journalists, businesspeople, and other citizens to interact with the Chinese people. We will thread into our actions our American commitment to diversity, inclusion, equity, and accessibility. We will – together with partners and allies – leverage our strengths, leadership, and strategic advantages to advance peace, security, and regional stability in the Indo-Pacific region. The U.S. Mission will push back against Beijing’s attempts to change the status quo across the Taiwan Strait, in accordance with our enduring one China policy, which is guided by the Taiwan Relations Act, the Three Joint Communiques, and the Six Assurances. We have an abiding interest in maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait, which is critical to regional and global security and prosperity and a matter of international concern and attention. We oppose any unilateral changes to the status quo from either side and will insist that Beijing commit to a peaceful resolution of the dispute, and maintain the status quo. The Mission will press the PRC to play an active role in achieving the full denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and eliminating Pyongyang’s illicit weapons programs. As we pursue these objectives, we will continue to press the PRC to respect international laws and norms, including freedom of navigation. We will strengthen deterrence in the East and South China Seas as well as the broader region.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 3 of 29Recognizing that our countries’ core values, governance systems, and economic interests contrast sharply and are often in conflict with each other, Mission China will sustain – and where possible, bolster – channels of communication to manage relations between our countries responsibly and to reduce the risk of conflict. While our countries compete vigorously, we will manage the competition responsibly. We will also promote cooperation wherever possible when our interests overlap, such as addressing climate change, waging joint efforts against illicit narcotics, and advancing global health, agricultural trade, nonproliferation, and aviation safety and security. We will support all of these actions by pursuing a fully staffed, fully resourced American diplomatic platform in China, populated by a team that is experienced, committed, and patriotic, and that reflects America’s diversity. We will pursue a top-of-the-line physical plant and the incorporation of cutting-edge communications infrastructure to support our operations. To sustain the long-term strength of the United States in this bilateral relationship, Mission China will enhance efforts to attract and develop the next generation of China-focused diplomatic experts from across the U.S. government. Our fundamental responsibility in Mission China is to represent the United States with professionalism and non-partisanship. We will implement the President’s policies, compete with the PRC across important domains, cooperate when it serves our national interest and work to manage our differences effectively. We seek to maintain and advance American power and preeminence in every respect while preserving the peace between our two countries.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 4 of 292. Mission Strategic Framework Mission Goal 1: Protect the security of U.S. citizens in the PRC as well as in the United States. •Mission Objective 1.1: Safeguard the full rights of U.S. citizens living in the PRC, including those rights accorded by bilateral agreements. Resolve the cases of the wrongfully detained in PRC prisons and other U.S. citizens subject to exit bans, and ensure that U.S. citizens are not unjustly targeted by PRC authorities.•Mission Objective 1.2: Protect the United States from PRC nationals engaged in attempts to acquire sensitive U.S. technologies, those who are members of Transnational Criminal Organizations and those involved in human rights abuses. Ensure that the PRC fulfills its obligations regarding U.S. Mission officials and family members’ diplomatic privileges and immunities under relevant international and bilateral treaties.Mission Goal 2: Together with partners and allies, leverage American strength, leadership, and strategic advantages to advance peace, security, and regional stability, with a particular focus on the Taiwan Strait and the DPRK. •Mission Objective 2.1: Enhance U.S. leadership, our military strength, credibility, and alliances in the Indo-Pacific consistent with U.S. national security objectives, including with respect to peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait, on the Korean Peninsula, in the East China Sea, in the South China Sea, and in the broader Indo-Pacific region.•Mission Objective 2.2: Establish effective guardrails to manage competition and deter PRC actions from turning competition into conflict, and to preserve the peace.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 5 of 29Mission Goal 3: Promote an economic and trade relationship that defends U.S. workers, farmers, and businesses; counters the PRC’s abusive economic practices; promotes U.S. goods and services; and advances U.S. technological competitiveness. •Mission Objective 3.1: Advance the interests of the United States by securing a level playing field for trade and investment involving the PRC.•Mission Objective 3.2: Uphold U.S. prosperity, competitiveness, security, and values by countering the PRC’s destabilizing policies and coercive actions, including restricting the PRC’s ability to acquire and use U.S. technology in a manner contrary to U.S. national security objectives.Mission Goal 4: Challenge the PRC to work with us in confronting climate change, epidemics, food insecurity, unregulated chemicals and narcotics – including the global opioid crisis – and other emerging threats to health. •Mission Objective 4.1: Elicit greater PRC climate ambitions and involvement. Engage the PRC to accelerate its ongoing energy transition, reduce pollution, conserve biodiversity, and improve environmental quality in line with the Paris Agreement to ensure a sustainable and climate-resilient world.•Mission Objective 4.2: Engage the PRC to improve overall global health security, including by countering global threats to public health and safety, food insecurity, unregulated precursor chemicals, and narcotics, including opioids.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 6 of 29Mission Goal 5: Champion American values to promote freedom and equality for all, including by promoting: the rule of law; freedom of speech, religion, assembly, and the press; combating censorship; promoting the principles of diversity and inclusion; and by advancing human rights and fundamental freedoms in the PRC, including but not limited to Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong. •Mission Objective 5.1: Promote and defend internationally recognized standards on human rights and rule of law, including the promotion of freedoms for marginalized groups and civil society.•Mission Objective 5.2: Support a more robust, open, inclusive, and active civil society through programs and engagement with key local audiences in China.Management Objective 1: Support, promote, and advance America’s constitutional rights of freedom of speech, assembly, religion, and our values of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility initiatives through effective communication, education, and active engagement and commitment from mission leadership and the entire mission community. Management Objective 2: Improve the security and reliability of our internal communications systems by fully staffing our IT and other platform support workforce and applying new technologies and programs. Management Objective 3: Protect all Mission China personnel to mitigate security threats to the Mission China community and enhance the safety, security, and reliability of facilities in support of Mission China strategic objectives.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 7 of 293. Mission Goals and Objectives Mission Goal 1 | Protect the security of U.S. citizens in the PRC as well as in the United States. Description | It is imperative that the PRC fulfills its obligation to secure the safety and welfare of U.S. citizens, including resolving wrongful detention cases; accepting the return of its citizens to be removed from the United States; and affording all U.S. citizens clear due process. Objective 1.1 | Safeguard the full rights of U.S. citizens living in the PRC according to bilateral agreements, resolve the cases of U.S. citizens wrongfully detained in PRC prisons and other U.S. citizens subject to exit bans, and ensure that U.S. citizens are not unjustly targeted by PRC authorities. •Justification | Local law enforcement and security services frequently employ extrajudicial means against U.S. citizens without regard to international norms, including the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and the 1980 U.S.-China Bilateral Consular Convention. These include broad travel prohibitions, known as “exit bans.” These are sometimes used to prevent U.S. citizens, who are not themselves suspected of a crime, from leaving the PRC to pressure relatives or associates in the United States who are wanted by PRC law enforcement to return to the PRC. PRC officials also arbitrarily detain and interrogate U.S. citizens for reasons related to “state security.” China is engaged in the ongoing wrongful detention of U.S. citizens. In addition, the PRC criminal justice system often subjects U.S. citizens to overly lengthy pre-trial detention in extremely difficult conditions while investigations are ongoing, and detention facilities arbitrarily prevent/limit detainees’ access to lawyers, medical treatment, and mail. Detention and prison facilities frequently postpone/cancel consular visits to prisoners and detainees ostensibly due to COVID-19 reasons which prevents consular staff from conducting required consular visits to detained U.S. citizens.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 8 of 29Linkages | The U.S. National Security Strategy (U.S. NSS) states our national interest is to protect the security of the American people; protecting the security of the American People in the PRC as well as in the United States directly contributes to that goal. Protecting human rights, addressing discrimination, and aligning our efforts with our network of allies and partners to push back when the PRC does not adhere to treaties and obligations are also key parts of the U.S. NSS. Strengthening our efforts to resolve wrongful detention and exit ban cases directly advances the goals outlined in the 2020 Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage-Taking Accountability Act. Expanding outreach to historically underserved U.S. citizens abroad and creating a more diverse pool of Citizen Liaison Volunteers (CLV) advances presidential Executive Order 13985. Providing better information so U.S. citizens can make more informed decisions furthers the Consular Affairs (CA) Functional Bureau Strategy goal of empowering U.S. citizens to make informed decisions for their safety while traveling or residing abroad.•Risks | Not achieving this objective creates risks for U.S. citizens in the PRC: the risk that additional U.S. citizens would be subject to wrongful treatment or detention, or that wrongful treatment or detention currently affecting U.S. citizens in the PRC would be extended or exacerbated. Mission China plans to mitigate these risks by providing all possible consular assistance – including regular visits and communication – to U.S. citizens who are detained or subject to exit bans, thereby creating additional transparency and accountability for PRC officials.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 9 of 29Objective 1.2 | Protect the United States from PRC nationals engaged in attempts to acquire sensitive U.S. technologies, those who are members of Transnational Criminal Organizations, and those involved in human rights abuses. The PRC fulfills its obligations regarding U.S. mission officials and family members’ diplomatic privileges and immunities under relevant international and bilateral treaties. •Justification | The PRC’s efforts to gain access to sensitive technologies by way of sending visa applicants to the United States is among the most pressing national security challenges. Mission China’s consular adjudicators are the U.S. border’s first line of defense against this threat. Strengthening and refining the visa vetting process will help Mission China improve vetting procedures to predict and identify these threats to U.S. national security. These measures ensure that the United States is not at risk from PRC travelers who present a threat to the safety or security of the United States, particularly in the field of technology transfer and human rights violations. The timely repatriation of PRC citizens under final order of removal from the United States is a national priority, and the PRC must adhere to international norms on issuing travel documents to its citizens. For Mission China to maintain the operational ability to achieve its objectives, the PRC must fulfill its obligations to respect our privileges and immunities.•Linkages | As outlined in Presidential Proclamation 10043, the U.S. government believes the PRC is engaged in a wide-ranging and heavily resourced campaign to acquire sensitive United States technologies and intellectual property to bolster the modernization and capability of its military. The U.S. NSS identifies the PRC as the only competitor with the technological power to reshape the international order and specifically prioritizes the role of technology in national security. The Department and the current Administration has called out the PRC’s human rights violations, citing ongoing human rights abuses in Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong. The 2020-2024 DHS Strategic Plan (DSP) highlights the negative impact of the individuals who blatantly disregard or undermine our immigration system and those countries who refuse toaccept these individuals for repatriation. Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 10 of 29Risks | Failure to achieve the objective could threaten U.S. geopolitical competitiveness and harm the security and economic stability of U.S. citizens. The U.S. NSS highlights that technology is central to today’s geopolitical competition and to the future of our national security, economy and democracy. Post’s current visa vetting processes comprehensively address risks associated with the travel of persons involved in PRCsponsored attempts to gain sensitive technologies. Post will continue to use existing vetting tools as well as implement the outlined key activities. To mitigate risks associated with the trafficking of fentanyl and synthetic opioids, post will seek to engage on all elements of this strategy, seeking out different methods of cooperation with PRC authorities.Mission Goal 2 | Together with partners and allies, leverage American strength, leadership, and strategic advantages to advance peace, security, and regional stability, including a particular focus on the Taiwan Strait and the DPRK. Description | The U.S.-PRC relationship comprises competitive, collaborative, and adversarial elements. To compete effectively, the United States must leverage its network of alliances and partnerships – as well as its technological advantages – to bolster global resiliency and respond to threats to peace, security, and regional stability. Mission China’s work on this goal supports the U.S. NSS’s priorities to protect the security of the American people and fulfill the U.S. commitment to peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific region.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 11 of 29Objective 2.1 | Enhance U.S. leadership, our military strength, credibility, and alliances in the Indo-Pacific consistent with U.S. national security objectives with respect to peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait, on the Korean Peninsula, in the East China Sea, the South China Sea and the broader Indo-Pacific region. •Justification | U.S. alliances and partnerships in the Indo-Pacific are foundational to preserving regional security and stability, economic prosperity, and shared democratic values. Even as stable regional security has fostered an environment conducive to the PRC’s sustained economic development, PRC leaders are increasingly assertive in challenging and destabilizing the rules-based international order. As stated in the U.S. NSS, the PRC is “the only competitor potentially capable of combining its economic, diplomatic, military, and technological power to mount a sustained challenge to a stable and open international system.” It is vital that the United States reinvigorate and strengthen the institutions, relationships, and technological leadership that have served United States and regional states’ interests so well for more than 75 years.•Linkages | Actions to enhance U.S. leadership, strength, and credibility in the IndoPacific region directly contribute to achieving U.S. national security priorities as delineated and described in the U.S. NSS, The Indo-Pacific Strategy, and the EAP-ASIA Joint Regional Strategy. Mission China will reinvigorate and modernize our alliances and partnerships around the world. Mission China will work with allies to share responsibilities equitably, while encouraging them to invest in their own comparative advantages against shared current and future threats. Mission China will urge allies and partners to join in leading and sustaining a stable and open international system, underwritten by strong democratic alliances, partnerships, multilateral institutions, and rules.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 12 of 29Risks | The PRC has sought unfair advantages, behaved aggressively and coercively, and undermined the rules and values at the heart of an open and stable international system. U.S. strength, leadership, and credibility in cooperative partnership with allies, partners, and friends is crucial to ensuring the region’s security and prosperity and, by direct extension, the security and prosperity of the United States. Given the region’s significant economic and security importance, the U.S. government must deter PRC aggression and counter threats to our collective security, prosperity, and democratic way of life.Objective 2.2 | Establish effective guardrails to manage competition and deter PRC actions from turning competition into conflict, and to preserve the peace. •Justification | Open channels of communication between the U.S. and PRC governments ensure that competition does not veer into conflict. Through practical, results-oriented diplomacy with the PRC government, Mission China will reduce the risk of misperceptions and miscalculations, as well as work to advance U.S. strategic interests; preserve cross-strait peace and stability; and address nuclear security and global proliferation concerns, including denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.•Linkages | This objective directly contributes to achieving U.S. national security priorities as delineated and described in the U.S. NSS, the Indo-Pacific Strategy, and the EAP-ASIA Joint Regional Strategy.•Risks | The United States does not seek conflict or confrontation with the PRC, but the United States will act in accordance with international law and its democratic values to maintain a free and open Indo-Pacific and defend our allies and partners. Even in areas where our two countries disagree and where strong competition exists, we must manage the relationship effectively to reduce the risk of conflict that would have serious consequences for global security and commerce.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 13 of 29Mission Goal 3 | Promote an economic and trade relationship that defends U.S. workers, farmers, and businesses; counters the PRC’s abusive economic practices; promotes U.S. goods and services; and advances U.S. technological competitiveness. Description | The U.S.-PRC economic and trade relationship is one of profound consequence. As the world’s two largest economies, the U.S.-PRC bilateral trade relationship impacts not just the United States and the PRC but the global economy and billions of workers. The bilateral relationship is complex and competitive, and the PRC’s lack of adherence to global trading norms has undercut the prosperity of the United States and other countries. It is crucial for the United States to manage the relationship with the PRC responsibly to promote fair competition and enhance U.S. competitiveness. Objective 3.1 | Advance the interests of the United States by securing a level playing field for trade and investment involving the PRC. •Justification | Given the size and dynamism of the market in the PRC, U.S. producers and businesses need fair and equal treatment to compete on an even playing field with PRC firms, to realize their full innovative capacities, and to retain global leadership. Ongoing PRC government actions to strengthen its state-centered economic system and non-market practices while attempting to rewrite established trading norms that run contrary to the international rules-based order and undermine a fair global trading system. Working alongside allies and partners, the United States must continue to promote and protect U.S. interests to enable healthy global competition.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 14 of 29Linkages | Securing a level playing field while promoting the interests of the United States aligns directly with the U.S. NSS, broader U.S. economic priorities as outlined in USTR Tai’s October 2021 speech on the U.S.-PRC trade relationship, the 2022 USTR Report to Congress on China’s WTO compliance, NSA Sullivan’s September 2022 speech on addressing outbound investments in sensitive technologies not captured by export controls, the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF), and the U.S.-China Joint Glasgow Declaration on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s, including: o Realigning trade policies to protect U.S. workers, businesses, farmers and producers, and the middle class, while also addressing concerns with PRC statecentered and non-market trade practices. (USTR) o Strengthening coordination with U.S. partners through bilateral and multilateral channels on shared objectives including fair trade facilitation, investment screening, standards for the digital economy and technology, supply chain resiliency, decarbonization and clean energy, infrastructure, and worker standards. (IPEF and USTR) o Ensuring that U.S. supply chains for critical national security technologies and medical supplies are secure. (U.S. NSS) o Ensuring inbound and outbound investments are not exploited to enhance the technological capabilities of competitors in ways that undermine U.S. and allied security. (U.S. NSS)Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 15 of 29Risks | With current global trends of rising nationalism, receding democracy, and growing rivalry with authoritarian states, it is important the United States actively promote shared U.S. values in an increasingly complex economic and technological environment. A more sustainable U.S.-PRC economic and trade relationship will promote prosperity for the United States, PRC, and the world. Achieving such a relationship requires the PRC to address the international community’s significant concerns about doing business in the PRC market and the PRC’s history of failing to abide by international or bilateral agreements and existing commitments. An engaged PRC that is willing to coordinate with the United States and global partners will help to address imbalances in trade, impediments to exports, and other regulatory hurdles.Objective 3.2 | Uphold U.S. prosperity, competitiveness, security, and values by countering the PRC’s destabilizing policies and coercive actions, including restricting the PRC’s ability to acquire and use U.S. technology in a manner contrary to U.S. national security objectives. •Justification | The PRC government takes actions that often threaten the national security and foreign policy interests of the United States and its partners. The United States must defend its interests, including by seeking to prevent the use of U.S. technologies and goods in ways that further the PLA’s military modernization, enhance the PRC’s surveillance state, and perpetuate human rights abuses.•Linkages | Mitigating problematic PRC policies and actions in the economic and trade space is fundamental to protecting U.S. economic security and values, as outlined in the U.S. NSS: o Countering unfair and illegal trade practices, cyber theft, and coercive economic practices that harm U.S. workers, undercut U.S. advanced and emerging technologies, and erode U.S. strategic and technological competitiveness. o Supporting PRC neighbors and commercial partners in defending their rights to make independent decisions free of coercion or undue influence. o Forging a common approach with like-minded countries in tackling shared challenges.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 16 of 29o Engaging with the PRC on a range of emerging military technological developments that implicate strategic stability. •Risks | In a global environment with an increasingly assertive PRC government intent on reshaping the international order, it is crucial for the United States to work on addressing problematic PRC policies and actions that undercut U.S. economic security and values, such as U.S. technologies being used to further the PLA’s military modernization and in human rights violations.Mission Goal 4 | Challenge the PRC to work with us in confronting climate change, epidemics, food insecurity, unregulated chemicals and narcotics including the global opioid crisis and other emerging threats to health. Description | The PRC is a critical source of emerging threats to the United States and global health, including through climate change, loss of biodiversity, pollution, narcotics and their precursors, and novel diseases. The PRC is the world’s largest national contributor of new greenhouse gas emissions (currently 30 percent, and rising, of global CO2 emissions). This necessitates greater PRC action to meet the Paris Agreement’s goal of holding the global average temperature increase to well below 2 degrees Celsius and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius. In the area of global health, a whole-of-government effort is needed to address global health as a national security imperative and requires active engagements with the PRC to achieve. As the two largest economies, the United States and the PRC must align to strengthen the world’s ability to prevent, detect, and respond to disease threats, including expanding access, delivery, and coverage of appropriate technologies to treat and prevent COVID-19, anti-microbial resistant pathogens, and other emerging and re-emerging diseases of public health significance, especially on the continent of Africa, whose largest trading partner is the PRC. In addition, global food security is beset by myriad challenges, including the climate crisis, ongoing COVID19 pandemic, conflicts and a lack of equity and inclusion which has resulted in rapidly rising global prices for food, fuel, and fertilizer. Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 17 of 29As the world’s largest agricultural producers and consumers with a significant bilateral food and agricultural trade relationship, the United States and the PRC must engage and support information exchanges that results in better and more sustainable agricultural development so as to benefit producers and consumers in both countries and in the rest of the world. Finally, regarding narcotics and their precursors, in 2017 HHS declared an opioid epidemic in the United States. In 2020, more than 56,000 Americans deaths involved synthetic opioids (other than methadone), which is more deaths than from any other type of opioid. Synthetic opioidinvolved deaths are being driven by increases in fentanyl-involved overdose deaths, and the source of the fentanyl is more likely to be illicitly manufactured than pharmaceutical. Pressing for greater PRC action across the areas of climate change, prevention of epidemics, countering narcotics and their precursors (especially synthetic opioids), addressing drivers of food insecurity, mitigation of other emerging health threats, and expanding safe vaccination coverage, will require a combination of collaborative, incentivized, and sometimes confrontational approaches that must engage all Mission China sections and agencies, as well as likeminded partners and allies.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 18 of 29Objective 4.1 | Elicit greater PRC climate ambitions and involvement. Engage the PRC to accelerate its ongoing clean energy transition, reduce pollution, conserve biodiversity, and improve environmental quality in line with the Paris Agreement to ensure a sustainable and climate-resilient world. •Justification | U.S. leadership – applied together with allies and partners – has been crucial to raising ambition among the world’s major emitters to tackle the climate crisis. President Biden’s January 2021 Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad placed climate change “at the forefront of this Nation’s foreign policy and national security,” calling for the United States to “work with other countries, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to put the world on a sustainable climate pathway.” The United States is making unprecedented generational investments in the clean energy transition through the domestic legislation, including the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, CHIPS Act, and Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. The United States has unveiled a series of Energy Earthshots, which aim to lower the cost and commercialize critical clean energy technologies, and we are enhancing federal, state, and local preparedness against and resilience to growing extreme weather threats. The October 2022 U.S. National Security Strategy (U.S. NSS) identified the climate crisis as “the existential challenge of our time.” The U.S.-China Joint Glasgow Declaration on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s further committed the United States and PRC to collaborate on increased ambitions to keep the goal of limiting temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius within reach. To prevent the PRC from backpedaling from its commitment, robust interactions with the PRC that promote stronger climate ambition through a combination of cooperation, competition, and, when necessary, imposed costs, is crucial. It is therefore vital that Mission China maintain a whole-of-mission approach that results in faster and greater greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reductions. In this effort, the United States will seek to work with a wide range of allies and partners to demonstrate resolve not only to protect our shared environment but also to enhance a system of global norms, including through the promotion of common values and laws.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 19 of 29Linkages | Actions to enhance U.S. climate leadership, including by moving the PRC to raise ambition, directly support U.S. national security priorities outlined in the October 2022 U.S. NSS by: o Protecting the security of the American people; o Expanding economic prosperity and opportunity, including by encouraging innovation, strengthening national competitiveness, and expanding opportunities for all Americans; and o Defending the democratic values at the heart of the American way of life.•Risks | Because of our economic size, global political influence, and climate leadership history, the United States is uniquely positioned to influence greater PRC action toward our shared goal of addressing the climate crisis. The PRC has so far resisted international climate leadership, despite its growing GHG emissions and economic size. Moreover, entrenched PRC interests, particularly within industries reliant on coal, have led some PRC officials to seek to undermine global efforts to reduce GHG emissions, including by using the PRC’s economic and political leverage to push other governments to weaken their climate ambitions. Furthermore, while the United States has made clear that we will not support the linkages of issues in a way that conditions cooperation on shared challenges, throughout this period and particularly since August 2022, some in Beijing have indicated that the PRC should expect concessions on unrelated issues as a prerequisite to cooperation. A U.S.-led effort to increase PRC climate ambition aligns with U.S. national security priorities, as outlined above. Scientific evidence underscores that greater global action is critical to hold the average global temperature rise below 1.5 degrees Celsius, beyond which the world will suffer increasing damage to national and global security, long-term economic growth, and exacerbated inequalities among peoples, regions, and nations.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 20 of 29Objective 4.2 | The United States engages the PRC to counter global threats to public health and safety, food insecurity, unregulated precursor chemicals and narcotics, including opioids, and improve overall global health security. •Justification | The National Security Strategy notes that transnational global health challenges – like COVID-19 – require collective international leadership and action to create stronger, more equitable, and more resilient health systems to prevent or prepare for the next pandemic or health emergency. Further, the United States and the PRC share a 40-year history of health engagement. Despite recent challenges in U.S. – PRC engagements, technical interactions continue in areas that address common health priorities, including the prevention and control of infectious diseases, improving public health surveillance, advancing biomedical research, countering the impact of noncommunicable diseases, increasing regulatory policy harmonization, protecting human and animal health, ensuring safer food and feed production, maintaining robust medical devices and pharmaceutical supply chains as well as interacting on health security issues of national importance. As the COVID-19 pandemic, an accelerating climate crisis, and conflict have brought global food security center stage, the United States will engage the PRC and work with international allies and non-governmental organizations to support a resilient food and agricultural system that accounts for global agricultural trade and the need for increasingly efficient production systems to benefit producers and consumers around the world. Engagement with the PRC in the areas of law, policy, and law enforcement, particularly counternarcotics, is crucial to addressing shared global concerns. Cooperation with the PRC on counternarcotics is imperative to address transnational criminal organizations trafficking synthetic opioids, most notably precursor chemicals used to produce fentanyl.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 21 of 29Linkages | This objective directly contributes to achieving several U.S. national security priorities as delineated and described in the U.S. NSS, the Global Health Security Agenda 2024, the Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains, the U.S. support to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) International Health Regulations 2005, and the U.S. pledge to the WHO backed COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access. The current U.S. Administration has prioritized global health and supply chain security within America’s national security agenda to end the COVID-19 pandemic and bolster health systems worldwide by improving preparation, prevention, detection, and response to both the current COVID-19 pandemic, and better prepare for the next global health threat. All strategies emphasize collective action to face the biggest threats, be they emerging biological risks, supply chain resilience, or the COVID-19 pandemic – none can be effectively addressed by one nation acting alone. Through coordinated and deliberate engagement, China can be a strategic partner to achieve these goals. Executive Order 14059 states that the trafficking into the United States of fentanyl and synthetic opioids “constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.” Beginning in March 2021, under the leadership of the National Security Council, the interagency drafted a Roadmap for Health and Biosecurity Engagement with the People’s Republic of China. The roadmap is intended to guide engagement with PRC health counterparts and help advance U.S. public health and global health security priorities bilaterally, multilaterally, with non-governmental entities, and with third countries. The roadmap includes the following priority areas for health engagement: o Infectious Disease Prevention, Surveillance, and Response o Data- and Sample-Sharing Norms and Practices o Food and Medical Product Safety o Laboratory Biosafety/Biosecurity o Ethical and Responsible Conduct of ResearchApproved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 22 of 29To increase the likelihood of success, the United States will engage the PRC, in collaboration with allies, partners, non-government organizations, and multilateral institutions, to advance the PRC’s transparent and timely data and sample sharing; promotion, delivery, and fair and equitable distribution of high-quality therapeutics, diagnostics and other technologies that prevent and treat COVID-19; and strengthen global cooperation and regulatory harmonization to prevent, detect, and respond to emerging diseases and supply chain threats. Additionally, the mission also draws on public diplomacy tools to raise awareness of public health and safety issues, clarify U.S. government positions on related issues, and share success stories achieved through bilateral and trilateral collaboration with third countries around the world. As outlined in the U.S. National Security Strategy, global food systems today are under threat from a variety of sources, including Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, climate events, and protracted conflicts. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has exacerbated an already worsening global food insecurity problem. Our actions to engage the PRC to address the issue would align with our support to the World Food Program, our Roadmap for Global Food Security: A Call to Action, and our Global Food Security Strategy. In 2020, more than 56,000 deaths involving synthetic opioids (other than methadone) occurred in the United States, which is more deaths than from any other type of opioid. Synthetic opioid-related death rates increased by over 56 percent from 2019 to 2020 and accounted for over 82 percent of all opioid-related deaths in 2020. Engaging with the PRC on this issue is critical to U.S. strategies to address the opioid epidemic.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 23 of 29Risks | Since Summer 2020, HHS has maintained several technical-level engagements with PRC counterparts. For example, the FDA leverages its on-going implementing arrangements with the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) and the General Administration of Customs China (GACC) and engages through regular bilateral meetings and requested attendance to commodity-specific conferences held at the national level. The U.S. CDC and NIH scientific staff conduct regular digital video conferences (DVCs) with counterparts on scientific questions of mutual interest. As noted in the September 12 Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy, “we must safeguard the United States bioeconomy, as foreign adversaries and strategic competitors alike use legal and illegal means to acquire United States technologies and data, including biological data, and proprietary or precompetitive information, which threatens United States economic competitiveness and national security.” While we work with the PRC to align with international norms and standards on bioethics and data and sample sharing, we will also need to take a clear-eyed approach to our engagement in biomedical research and regulatory standards. Failure to achieve the objective could result in threats to national security, safety of U.S. citizens, and substantial costs associated with reversing the impact of opioid dependence on domestic communities. To mitigate these risks, post will seek to engage on all elements of this strategy, while retaining the flexibility to mitigate risks by seeking out different methods of cooperation with PRC authorities. As such, we do face risk related to PRC policies on research data and biological sample sharing. Passed in 2020, these new data sovereignty laws, regulations, and policies involve a complex multi-agency approval process which restricts some biomedical research cooperation.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 24 of 29The United States does not seek conflict or confrontation with the PRC, and will act in accordance with international laws, norms, and standards related to disease detection, control, prevention, regulatory governance, and biomedical research. Even in areas where our two countries disagree and where strong competition exists, we must manage the relationship effectively to reduce the risk of conflict that would have serious consequences for global health security.Mission Goal 5 | Champion American values to promote freedom and equality for all, including by promoting: the rule of law; freedom of speech, religion, assembly, and the press; combating censorship; promoting the principles of diversity and inclusion; and by advancing human rights and fundamental freedoms in the PRC, including but not limited to Xinjiang, Tibet, and Hong Kong. Description | In support of the U.S. NSS objective of defending democratic values across the world, Mission China will continue its work to encourage the PRC to be more responsive and accountable to its own citizens by leveraging unilateral and multilateral tools to advance human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law. In all aspects of the U.S.-PRC relationship, the U.S. government will press for the protection of individual and collective rights and freedoms and rule of law, including religious freedoms, labor rights, and freedom of speech and of the press, equal treatment of women and minorities, and due process. The U.S. government will also engage with PRC citizens to increase support for an open, democratic, and inclusive society, as well as to strengthen the PRC’s civil society.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 25 of 29Objective 5.1 | Promote and defend internationally recognized standards on human rights and the rule of law, including the safeguarding of freedoms for marginalized groups and civil society. •Justification | The PRC continues to commit violations of human rights and deprives its citizens of fundamental freedoms. In addition, the PRC attempts to silence dissenting voices through extraterritorial censorship and physical and digital intimidation. The PRC attempts to normalize these practices through engagement with the UN system and international organizations.•Linkages | President Biden has said that “human rights will be the center of our foreign policy” and this objective directly advances this Presidential priority. Confronting the PRC bilaterally and multilaterally on its human rights record, and curbing the PRC’s attempts to normalize it globally, directly satisfies the U.S. NSS goal of defending democratic values across the world. Advancing human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law also supports marginalized communities in the PRC that face discrimination, harassment, and other forms of injustice, in support of E.O. 13985.•Risks | Leaving the PRC unchecked to continue its domestic and foreign policies that routinely violate internationally recognized standards of human rights risks the global normalization – and perhaps proliferation – of these authoritarian practices that deprives PRC citizens of fundamental freedoms, threatens the national security of the United States, and undermines the rules-based international order.Objective 5.2 | Support a more robust, open, inclusive, and active civil society through programs and engagement with key local audiences in China. •Justification | Mission China supports the development and strengthening of China’s civil society, including through increased awareness and support for diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) principles, rule of law, academic freedom and exchange, and freedom of expression and the press. Promoting and defending democratic values is essential to combat threats to free societies.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASE•Page 26 of 29Linkages | As noted in the U.S. NSS, democracy is vital to freedom, prosperity, peace, and dignity. Defending equal rights of all people ensures that the rights of U.S. citizens are also protected. A civil society supported by a free press and social media environment connects likeminded people, supports a healthy and orderly free market, and keeps corruption in check. Advancing human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law also supports marginalized communities in the PRC that face discrimination, harassment, and other forms of injustice, in support of E.O. 13985.•Risks | Without sustained engagement with PRC citizens, support for political reforms in the PRC may decrease and civil society may shrink, leading to increased suppression of political rights and a less resilient, more reactionary PRC. Without consistent U.S. government pushback, PRC disinformation and propaganda aimed at domestic and international audiences are more likely to normalize and entrench false narratives about democracy, human rights, and the rules-based international order. Public engagement with PRC citizens keeps bilateral communication channels open in the face of increasingly hostile actions by the PRC government.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 27 of 294. Management Objectives Management Objective 1 | Support, promote, and advance diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility initiatives through effective communication, education, and active engagement and commitment from mission leadership and the entire mission community. •Justification | The U.S. government's objective to promote equity is to provide everyone the chance to achieve their full potential. Each agency must examine, in accordance with these goals, whether its programs and policies maintain structural obstacles to opportunities and benefits for persons of color and other under-served groups and what extent. Such evaluations would better enable agencies to formulate policies and programs that provide equitable resources and benefits for all.•Linkages | Executive Order 13985, titled “Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government.” 21 STATE 119158, Integrating the President's Equity Agenda, including E.O. 13985, into Foreign Policy and Strategic Planning. 21 STATE 119310, Guidance for Integrated Country Strategies (ICS) to Implement E.O. 13985.•Risks | By not advancing equity across the U.S. government, we lose opportunities to change programs and policies perpetuating systemic barriers to opportunities and benefits for historically underserved groups.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 28 of 29Management Objective 2 | Improve the security and reliability of our communications systems by fully staffing our IT and other platform support workforce and applying new technologies and programs. •Justification | Ensuring the integrity, availability, and confidentiality of our networks is the goal of any organization and this can only be accomplished through the proper life cycle management of all IT assets. This requires full staffing to perform the tasks and a functioning supply chain to receive the equipment required for the deployment of new technologies and programs.•Linkages | Information Resource Management (IRM) Functional Bureau Strategy’s first goal: Increase the usability, accessibility, resilience, and security of data and systems across IRM; second goal: Facilitate IRM legacy IT modernization by increasing cloud and centralized shared services; third goal: Improve the bureau’s talent pool by assessing the gaps, targeted training and recruiting, and innovative incentives.•Risks | Less than full staffing and outdated technology and equipment inhibits our ability to complete mandated tasks and challenges our ability to meet our service standards. This will result in system latency or in severe cases the loss of network resources and a customer base left without the tools they require to fully complete their roles in advancing our mission’s goals and objectives.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE

FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage 29 of 29Management Objective 3 | Protect all Mission China personnel to mitigate security threats to the Mission China community and enhance the safety, security, and reliability of facilities in support of Mission China strategic objectives. •Justification | Safe and secure U.S. government facilities are required in the PRC to successfully carry out the goals of Mission China. To enhance the safety, security and reliability of facilities, new sites will have to be secured for new facilities to be built and agreements on construction projects must be reached with the host government. A secure resupply agreement must be reached with the host government for mission facilities to be safely maintained, and for new construction and maintenance projects to move forward. The U.S. government and PRC government must negotiate reciprocal new construction projects for respective diplomatic facilities in each other’s countries.•Linkages | First linkage is related to the Overseas Building Operations Functional Bureau Strategy that states: Enhance the security, safety, functionality, and resilience of facilities and residences through the design and construction program; the second linkage states: Improve the resilience and maximize the lifespan of our facilities through adaptive and sustainable asset management programs.•Risks | Without a reliable facilities platform to conduct our mission throughout the PRC, Mission China cannot operate efficiently or safely in pursuit of all of its goals and objectives.Approved: May 3, 2022 Reviewed and Updated: February 2, 2023FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
