1. On January 11, 2018, the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) transmitted to the President a report on the Secretary's investigation into the effect of imports of steel mill articles (steel articles) on the national security of the United States under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended (19 U.S.C. 1862). The Secretary found and advised the President of his opinion that steel articles are being imported into the United States in such quantities and under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security of the United States.2. In Proclamation 9705 of March 8, 2018 (Adjusting Imports of Steel Into the United States), the President concurred in the Secretary's finding that steel articles, as defined in clause 1 of Proclamation 9705, as amended by clause 8 of Proclamation 9711 of March 22, 2018 (Adjusting Imports of Steel Into the United States), are being imported into the United States in such quantities and under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security of the United States, and decided to adjust the imports of those steel articles by imposing a 25 percent ad valorem tariff on such articles imported from all countries except Canada and Mexico. The proclamation further stated that any country with which we have a security relationship is welcome to discuss with the United States alternative ways to address the threatened impairment to the national security caused by imports from that country, and noted that, should the United States and any such country arrive at a satisfactory alternative means to address the threat to the national security such that the President determines that imports from that country no longer threaten to impair the national security, the President may remove or modify the restriction on steel articles imports from that country and, if necessary, adjust the tariff as it applies to other countries, as the national security interests of the United States require.3. The United States has successfully concluded discussions with the United Kingdom (UK) on satisfactory alternative means to address the threatened impairment to the national security posed by imports of steel articles and derivative steel articles from the UK. The United States and the UK have agreed to expand coordination involving trade remedies and customs matters, monitor bilateral steel and aluminum trade, cooperate on addressing non-market excess capacity and carbon intensity in these sectors, annually review their arrangement and their ongoing cooperation, and ensure that steel articles exports from the UK to the United States under the applicable tariff-rate quota for steel articles are not supported by market-distorting practices.4. The United States will implement a number of actions, including a tariff-rate quota that restricts the quantity of steel articles and derivative steel articles imported into the United States from the UK without the application of the tariff proclaimed in Proclamation 9705. Under the arrangement, steel articles that are melted and poured in the UK and imported from either the UK or further processed in the European Union, conferring European Union country of origin, and subsequently imported into the United States from the European Union are eligible for in-quota treatment. In my judgment, these measures will provide an effective, long-term alternative means to address any contribution by UK steel articles and derivative steel articles imports to the threatened impairment to the national security by restraining steel articles and derivative steel articles imports to the United States from the UK, limiting transshipment, discouraging excess steel capacity and production, and strengthening the United States-UK partnership. In light of this agreement, I have determined that imports of specified volumes of eligible steel articles and derivative steel articles from the UK will no longer threaten to impair the national security and have decided to exclude such imports from the UK up to a designated quota from the tariff proclaimed in Proclamation 9705. The United States will monitor the implementation and effectiveness of the tariff-rate quota and other measures agreed upon with the UK in addressing our national security needs, and I may revisit this determination, as appropriate.5. I conclude that the UK presents a special case because of the unique nature of the special relationship that exists between the United States and the UK. The United States has a deep security relationship with the UK, including a shared commitment to mutual support in addressing national security concerns, particularly through security, defense, and intelligence partnerships; a strong economic and strategic partnership; and a shared commitment to addressing global excess capacity in steel production.6. The alternative means, including the tariff-rate quota, advance the recommendations contained in the Secretary's January 2018 report. The agreed-upon aggregate tariff-rate quota volume specified in the agreement between the United States and the UK, totaling 500,000 metric tons, is consistent with the objective of reaching and maintaining a sufficient capacity utilization rate in the domestic steel industry and reflects the continued importance of the special relationship that exists between the United States and the UK.7. In light of my determination to adjust the tariff proclaimed in Proclamation 9705 as applied to eligible steel articles and derivative steel articles that are melted and poured in the UK and imported from either the UK or the European Union, I have considered whether it is necessary and appropriate in light of our national security interests to make any corresponding adjustments to such tariff as it applies to other countries. I have determined that it is necessary and appropriate, at this time, to maintain the current tariff level as it applies to other countries.8. Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended, authorizes the President to adjust the imports of an article and its derivatives that are being imported into the United States in such quantities or under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security.9. Section 604 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (19 U.S.C. 2483), authorizes the President to embody in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS) the substance of statutes affecting import treatment, and actions thereunder, including the removal, modification, continuance, or imposition of any rate of duty or other import restriction.
