1. On June 30, 2025, the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) transmitted to me a report on his investigation into the effects of imports of copper in all forms (copper), including copper ores, copper concentrates, refined copper, copper alloys, scrap copper, and derivative products, on the national security of the United States under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, as amended,  (section 232). Based on the facts considered in that investigation, the Secretary found and advised me of his opinion that copper is being imported into the United States in such quantities and under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security of the United States.2. The Secretary found that the present quantities of copper imports and the circumstances of global excess capacity for producing copper are weakening our economy, resulting in the persistent threat of further closures of domestic copper production facilities and the shrinking of our ability to meet national security production requirements. Because of these risks, and taking into account the close relation of the economic welfare of the Nation to our national security and other relevant factors, see, the Secretary found that the present quantities and circumstances of copper imports threaten to impair the national security as provided in section 232.3. In reaching this conclusion, the Secretary found that copper is essential to the manufacturing foundation on which United States national and economic security depend. Copper is the second most widely used material by the Department of Defense and is a necessary input in a range of defense systems, including aircraft, ground vehicles, ships, submarines, missiles, and ammunition. Copper also plays a central role in the broader United States industrial base. The metal's exceptional electrical conductivity and durability also make it indispensable to critical infrastructure sectors that support the American economy, national security, and public health. Alternatives to copper are insufficient substitutes for these vital industries and products in many circumstances.4. The Secretary found that the United States was a world leader across the value chain of copper production (mining, refining, semi-finished goods, and finished goods containing copper) for most of the 20th century. But despite copper being a crucial material in manufacturing and for the national and economic security of the United States, United States copper production has plummeted. Today, a single foreign country dominates global copper smelting and refining, controlling over 50 percent of global smelting capacity and holding four of the top five largest refining facilities.5. The Secretary found that unfair trade practices abroad, exacerbated by overly burdensome environmental regulations at home, have hollowed out United States copper refining and smelting, caused the United States to be overly reliant on foreign copper imports, and prevent a path forward without strong corrective action. Foreign competitors leverage state subsidies and overproduction to flood international markets with artificially low-priced copper products, driving United States producers out of business. The United States is now dangerously dependent on foreign imports of semi-finished copper, intensive copper derivative products, and copper-containing products, and imbalances in the global markets make domestic investment increasingly unviable.6. The Secretary found that United States dependency on foreign sources of copper is a national security vulnerability that could be exploited by foreign countries, weakens United States industrial resilience, exposes the American people to supply chain disruptions, economic instability, and strategic vulnerabilities, and jeopardizes the United States defense industrial base.7. In light of these findings, the Secretary recommended a range of actions to adjust the imports of copper so that such imports will not threaten to impair the national security. For example, the Secretary recommended an immediate universal 30 percent import duty on semi-finished copper products and intensive copper derivative products. The Secretary also recommended a phased universal tariff on refined copper of 15 percent starting in 2027 and 30 percent starting in 2028. The Secretary further recommended a domestic sales requirement for copper input materials starting at 25 percent in 2027, a domestic sales requirement of 25 percent for high-quality copper scrap, and export controls for high-quality copper scrap.8. After considering the Secretary's report, the factors in section 232(d), , and other relevant factors, among other things, I concur with the Secretary's finding that copper is being imported into the United States in quantities and under circumstances that threaten to impair the national security of the United States. In my judgment, and in light of the Secretary's report, the factors in section 232(d), , and other relevant factors, among other things, I also determine that it is necessary and appropriate to impose tariffs, as described below, to adjust imports of copper and its derivatives so that such imports will not threaten to impair the national security of the United States.9. To ensure that the tariffs on copper in this proclamation are not circumvented and that the purpose of this action to address the threat to impair the national security of the United States posed by imports of copper is not undermined, I also deem it necessary and appropriate to set up a process to identify and impose tariffs on certain derivatives of copper, as further described below.10. In my judgment, the action in this proclamation will, among other things, help increase domestic production of semi-finished copper products and intensive copper derivative products, thereby reducing our Nation's reliance on foreign sources. It will ensure that domestic fabricators are able to supply sufficient quantities of copper products essential for infrastructure, defense systems, and advanced manufacturing. This action will also promote investment, employment, and innovation in the domestic copper fabrication sector, strengthen supply chains, enhance industrial resilience, and generate meaningful economic benefits. This action will adjust the imports of semi-finished copper products, intensive copper derivative products, and certain other copper derivatives and is necessary and appropriate to address the threat to impair the national security of the United States posed by imports of such articles.11. Section 232 authorizes the President to adjust the imports of an article and its derivatives that are being imported into the United States in such quantities or under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security so that such imports will not threaten to impair the national security.12. Section 604 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended, , authorizes the President to embody in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States (HTSUS) the substance of statutes affecting import treatment, and actions thereunder, including the removal, modification, continuance, or imposition of any rate of duty or other import restriction.13. Consistent with the General Terms for the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Economic Prosperity Deal (May 8, 2025), the United States intends to coordinate with the United Kingdom to adopt a structured, negotiated approach to addressing the national security threat in the copper sector.
