2024 USTR Report to Congress on China's WTO Compliance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

OVERVIEW

In this report, we provide an updated assessment of China's WTO membership. This assessment reveals the unique, serious and constantly evolving challenge that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade continues to pose for the global trading community. While the United States and other like-minded WTO Members have pursued various WTO-focused strategies over the years to address the many problems created by China's non-market economic system, it remains clear that new and more effective strategies – including strategies that involve taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – are critically needed to address those problems. In particular, it has become clear that China's non-market economic system has evolved and become predatory, as China has designed its industrial plans for Chinese enterprises to displace foreign competitors and dominate targeted industries, both in China and globally.

Below, we first summarize China's compliance record as a WTO Member, which is poor. We then describe China's evolution into economic predation and detail how China's non-market economic system currently operates. Finally, we discuss the United States' multi-faceted strategy for addressing the China challenge. As we explain below, while this strategy is sound and is working, more remains to be done. In particular, with China's evolution into economic predation, the United States' strategy also needs to evolve.

POOR WTO COMPLIANCE RECORD

When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it voluntarily agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and to embed it in China's economic and trading system and institutions. China also agreed to take on the obligations set forth in existing WTO rules, while also making numerous China-specific commitments. As we previously documented, and as remains true today, China's record of compliance with these terms has been poor.

China has a long record of violating, disregarding and evading existing WTO rules. China has also sought to frustrate WTO oversight and accountability mechanisms, such as through its poor record of adhering to its WTO transparency obligations. In addition, and more critically, after more than two decades of WTO membership, China still embraces a non-market economic system, despite other WTO Members' expectations – and China's own representations – that China would transform its economy and pursue the open, market-oriented approach foundational to the WTO. In fact, China's embrace of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has increased rather than decreased over the past decade, and the mercantilism that it generates has harmed and disadvantaged U.S. workers and companies, as well as companies and workers of other WTO Members, often severely. Notably, China's non-market economic system has also become decidedly predatory in nature.

The vast majority of the harm that China inflicts upon other WTO Members is attributable to the daily and compounding impact of China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, which relies heavily on significant interventions in the market by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP or the Party). As is well-documented, the Chinese government and the CCP routinely intervene in the market in a predatory manner using a wide array of non-market policies and practices, both to provide substantial artificial competitive advantages to targeted Chinese industries and enterprises and to actively disadvantage foreign industries and enterprises and their workers. These non-market policies and practices include not only massive and pervasive – and often non-transparent – subsidization, which is extremely large both in terms of absolute value and in relation to the size of the targeted industry, but also numerous other unfair policies and practices. Key examples include market access limitations, investment restrictions, forced or pressured technology transfer including state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, preferential treatment for state-owned enterprises and other favored Chinese companies, discriminatory regulation, unique national standards, data restrictions, inadequate protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights, the use of competition law enforcement for industrial policy purposes, and unfair labor practices, including forced labor.

ECONOMIC PREDATION

In recent years, a significant evolution has taken place in China's approach to the economy and trade. China has not simply continued to pursue what it termed a "socialist market economy" when it joined the WTO. China's so-called "socialist market economy" has evolved and turned decidedly predatory in nature. In other words, China no longer relies on central planning simply to direct and guide the business decisions of Chinese industries and enterprises, as do a handful of other non-market economies around the world. Rather, today's China is unique among them as it is now using its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade in ways designed to displace foreign competitors and secure the dominance of Chinese enterprises in targeted industries, both in the China market and in global markets.

This evolution in China's non-market economic system follows China's rise as an economic power. Since becoming a Member of the WTO, China has become the second largest economy in the world and the largest trader among WTO Members. The size of China's economy and the industries that it spawns has provided China with substantial economic and political power, which it now readily wields.

Over the years, observers coined various terms to describe China's economic system, from "state capitalism" to "China, Inc." and, more recently, "CCP, Inc." When coined, this terminology appropriately captured the essence of China's non-market economic system. It conveyed that foreign companies are competing not only against Chinese enterprises but also the Chinese state, giving rise to unfair competition and an unlevel playing field.

Today, however, this terminology is no longer sufficient to convey the unique challenge that China poses for the global trading community. Today, China's economic system must be viewed as predatory.

In recent years, with China's decided turn to predatory behavior, backed by China's enormous economic power, it is no longer accurate simply to view the Chinese state and Chinese enterprises as a single corporate conglomerate against which foreign companies are unfairly forced to compete. Rather, today's China seeks to displace foreign competitors and to secure dominant production and market shares for Chinese enterprises in key industries, both in the China market and in global markets, and it pursues this dominance in both traditional industries and emerging industries through predatory behavior. As is readily apparent, moreover, the non-market policies and practices that China deploys in pursuit of its dominance objectives often have a devastating impact on bilateral and global trade as well as on the targeted industries, workers and businesses of other countries, as the world has seen in sectors like steel, aluminum, solar and electric vehicles.

As so many of China's industrial plans reflect, with Made in China 2025 as a particularly egregious example, China's version of industrial targeting is different from what the world has seen in the past. In the 1980s, when the term "industrial targeting" was first commonly applied, it referred to the assistance that the Japanese government was then providing to Japanese companies in industries like the automobile industry. China's industrial targeting is a significantly more predatory version, as it does not simply seek to establish a capable Chinese competitor, but rather seeks to aggressively displace foreign competitors. Additionally, China's industrial targeting is now backed by the economic power of the second largest economy in the world and is driven forward by a state with a long track record of significant and relentless intervention in the economy.

The challenge that China's economic predation presents for the global trading community is immense, and the tools for dealing with this challenge are imprecise at best. Indeed, the currently available tools have not been able to stop China's predatory strategies. Existing trade laws have not traditionally been applied to address the type of predatory behavior being pursued by today's China.

One example of the new and unique type of predatory behavior that China pursues in the international trade context relates to what is traditionally called predatory pricing. Typically, in a market economy, predatory pricing takes place when a private company sets its prices unrealistically low, driving out its competitors and achieving monopoly power. The private company then raises its prices to recoup its losses while maintaining its dominant position. A similar dynamic plays out under many of China's industrial plans, but with important differences.

When China engages in industrial targeting and targets an industry for domination, its enterprises typically set their prices very low and often below cost, not unlike a private company with monopoly power in a market economy engaging in predatory pricing. However, the Chinese enterprises typically engage in this pricing behavior largely in unison, and they can sustain the heavy losses that their unreasonably low prices cause them for much longer periods of time than a private company in a market economy because of the substantial financial and regulatory support continually provided to them by the Chinese state. Moreover, even after their predatory pricing behavior drives out most of the foreign competitors from the domestic market, Chinese enterprises – given the backing of the state -- do not always charge higher prices to recoup their losses, as a private company in a market economy engaged in predatory pricing behavior might typically do. Instead, they may maintain their artificially low prices for long periods of time while they expand globally, as we have seen in the solar sector. Indeed, profit and loss – and monopoly rents – are not the motivators behind China's industrial targeting. Instead, China pursues industrial targeting to secure its industrial advancement, to achieve technological self-sufficiency and to dominate global markets and supply chains.

Meanwhile, when non-market excess capacity develops in a targeted industry, as it often does, the Chinese state encourages Chinese enterprises to continue to produce and to sell their excess production abroad, effectively exporting China's unemployment to other countries. In other words, even after achieving their dominance in the domestic market and even globally, Chinese enterprises continue to benefit from substantial financial and regulatory support from the Chinese state, and they often continue to keep their prices low, while the remaining foreign competitors and their workers continue to suffer harm from China's unfair competition and an unlevel playing field.

Another example of the new and unique type of predatory behavior that China pursues in the international trade context relates to what is traditionally called predatory bidding. Typically, in a market economy, predatory bidding takes place when a private company bids up the price of a critical input, paying more than the market price and foreclosing rival companies from competing and driving them from the market. Through this behavior, the private company secures monopsony power, which it subsequently is able to exploit by paying lower prices for the critical input, allowing it to recoup its losses. A similar dynamic plays out under some of China's industrial plans focused on advanced manufacturing industries, but again with important differences.

While companies in market economies typically purchase raw material inputs such as critical minerals from miners or processors around the world at the prevailing market rate, the Chinese state pursues a strategy in which it directs Chinese enterprises to purchase controlling interests in mines around the world at whatever price is necessary, typically with the understanding that they will send most of the output back to China for processing by Chinese enterprises. This strategy has led to China's dominant position in the supply of raw material inputs, including critical minerals such as nickel, lithium, cobalt, rare earths, antimony, tungsten, gallium, germanium and graphite, which are essential inputs for numerous advanced manufactured products, to the disadvantage of foreign competitors that manufacture downstream products using these raw material inputs. China also continually acts to maintain its dominant position by again lowering the price that it charges foreign enterprises whenever it detects foreign efforts to develop competing mines, rendering these foreign efforts economically unviable.

Unlike a market economy actor engaging in predatory bidding, however, China is not focused on recouping its losses. While China is certainly determined to exploit the dominant position that it maintains in the impacted supply chains in an effort to ensure the dominance of Chinese enterprises in the intermediate and final products manufactured from the critical minerals that it has targeted, the ultimate motive is, once again, not profit. Rather, as in the case of other industries, China seeks to displace foreign competitors and dominate industries involved in advanced manufacturing in order to secure its industrial advancement and to expand its overall economic power and leverage, which, among other things, facilitates its use of economic coercion. At the same time, the goal of becoming technologically self-sufficient is front and center for these industries, as China hopes to eliminate its dependencies on major countries like the United States and other market economies.

Notably, China's predatory behavior, in whatever form it takes, does not merely harm other developed economies with mature industries. Rather, as China pursues industrial plans targeting key industries for dominance, it especially harms emerging and developing economies. Too often, emerging and developing economies cannot successfully develop their own competing industries and instead become more dependent on China, something economists call "premature deindustrialization."

CHINA'S PREDATORY NON-MARKET ECONOMY

Under China's non-market economic system, control and direction of all aspects of the economy is retained by the Chinese government and the CCP, facilitated by a reliance on rule by law rather than rule of law. The mere fact that decisions in the marketplace are often made based on the objectives of the state, rather than based on commercial considerations, distorts China's economy and, in turn, the global economy in ways that can damage and weaken the economies of China's trading partners, given that China is the second largest economy in the world and the largest trader among WTO Members. This damage comes as no surprise to the Chinese state, as its typical motivation is to displace foreign competitors and secure dominant positions for Chinese enterprises in an array of targeted industries.

The non-market policies and practices that China has deployed over the years in support of Chinese industries and enterprises are myriad. They are also constantly evolving. While the particular combination of non-market policies and practices that China currently deploys in pursuit of securing dominant market shares for Chinese businesses domestically and globally can vary from industry to industry, the Chinese state commonly deploys a wide assortment of non-market policies and practices including:

adopting and pursuing industrial plans that target specific industries for domination by Chinese enterprises, including by establishing capacity, production and export levels or market share targets;

directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises adhere to the objectives set forth in state industrial plans;

placing CCP officials in state-owned enterprises and private Chinese enterprises in management positions in order to monitor, direct, pressure or otherwise influence commercial decision making;

deploying massive and frequently non-transparent subsidies relentlessly in pursuit of industrial plan objectives, including via policy banks, state-owned commercial banks and government investment and guidance funds at all levels of government;

transferring risk to the state through loan guarantees and loan rollovers for Chinese enterprises in targeted industries;

failing to publish final central level and provincial level measures that provide subsidies or other financial support to Chinese enterprises;

directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that foreign enterprises operating in China not make business decisions that conflict with the objectives of the state's industrial plans, including in some cases by embedding CCP officials in those enterprises;

according special regulatory and other preferences and competitive advantages to state-owned enterprises;

directing or allowing government regulatory authorities to exercise their authority in a discriminatory manner, including by treating Chinese enterprises more favorably than foreign or foreign-invested enterprises;

directing or sponsoring the theft of intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information for commercial use;

engaging in forced or pressured technology transfer;

directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises pursue acquisitions of foreign enterprises whose technologies are needed to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises purchase Chinese-made products over imported products in accordance with the state's industrial plan objectives;

directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises invest in and secure access to raw materials outside of China for the sole use of Chinese enterprises producing downstream products in accordance with the state's industrial plan objectives;

retaliating against foreign enterprises when they offend the Chinese state or otherwise act in a manner that displeases the Chinese state, thereby creating a chilling business environment for all foreign enterprises, especially ones with business operations located in China;

using selective or arbitrary application or enforcement of intellectual property law to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

using selective or arbitrary application or enforcement of competition law to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

pursuing unique national standards when international standards already exist, with the intent of leveraging the economic power of China's market to promote or compel the adoption of those standards in global markets;

using unfair labor practices, such as forced labor, restrictions on labor mobility, institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management, the denial of the rights of workers to associate and to organize and collectively bargain, and a prohibition on the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, which artificially lower labor costs for Chinese enterprises, especially in industrial sectors;

condoning lax enforcement of environmental laws and regulations, which artificially lowers labor costs for Chinese enterprises, especially in industrial sectors;

creating or maintaining persistent non-market excess capacity in industries through state-owned enterprises and private Chinese enterprises, to the detriment of competing foreign enterprises in the China market and in global markets around the world;

directing the judiciary to render decisions that serve the state's industrial plan objectives; and

failing to publish all central level and provincial level laws, regulations and other measures that impact the rights and obligations of enterprises and individuals.

It is evident that China does not deploy these non-market policies and practices in isolation or only in a few industries. China resorts to some combination of these non-market policies and practices in many industries, even beyond the industries targeted for dominance. China's efforts are also relentless. China has shown every indication that it will continue to intervene in the market in any way that it deems necessary to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives. When China intervenes, moreover, it does not act with moderation.

As has become evident to the United States and China's other trading partners, one of the more problematic manifestations of China's predatory non-market economic system is the creation of non-market excess capacity – that is, production capacity that would not have been created or would not persist if market forces were operating properly. Moreover, given China's economic size, being the second largest economy in the world and the largest trader among WTO Members, when China develops excess capacity, it has global implications, and those implications are broadly negative.

In a market economy, excess capacity can also occur periodically. However, it is typically a cyclical, short-term condition that market forces correct. In contrast, excess capacity in China is often structural and tends to persist and become severe. Because China's economic approach is founded on state intervention, the state typically responds to excess capacity by continuing to deploy non-market policies and practices that inevitably act to incentivize Chinese enterprises to continue manufacturing excessive amounts of products and sell them at unreasonably low or below-cost prices, particularly in export markets. Often, many of the incentives provided by the state originate from a provincial government, which does not want manufacturers within the province to go out of business because the provincial government depends on its share of the national tax revenues generated from manufacturers within the province to fund the services that it is required to provide to its citizens.

At the same time, the forms of China's excess capacity are not always the same as those found when excess capacity temporarily emerges in an industry in a market economy. For some industries in China, the capacity utilization rate is relatively low, signaling excess capacity as can be found in a market economy. For other industries in China, however, the capacity utilization rate remains in a normal range but enterprises engage in overproduction, as they produce excessive quantities of their products in relation to demand and then sell those products at unreasonably low prices, particularly in export markets. The substantial financial and regulatory support that China typically continues to provide to these enterprises prevents the market from correcting this behavior, and the overproduction and artificially low prices persist. In addition, in some of these industries, the overproduction leads to an overconcentration of production in China, such as in the solar sector, where China now accounts for 80 percent of global production. This overconcentration of production makes global supply chains less resilient and more vulnerable to disruption, whether caused by external supply shocks or geopolitical malfeasance by China.

In the past, China itself has acknowledged the existence of excess capacity in several of its industries, including steel, cement, aluminum, flat glass and shipbuilding. Numerous other Chinese industries with non-market excess capacity have been identified by industry associations in the United States and other countries, such as solar, electric vehicles, lithium-ion batteries and fisheries. Some of the additional Chinese industries most likely to inflict the disastrous consequences of severe excess capacity on the world in the future can be found in the Made in China 2025 industrial plan. Through that plan, the Chinese government is seeking to create dominant Chinese companies in numerous industries found within 10 broad sectors, including advanced information technology, robotics and automated machine tools, aircraft and aircraft components, maritime vessels and marine engineering equipment, advanced rail equipment, new energy vehicles, electrical generation and transmission equipment, agricultural machinery, new materials and pharmaceuticals and medical devices. By some estimates, the Chinese government is making available more than $500 billion of financial support to these sectors, often using large government guidance funds that China attempts to shield from scrutiny by claiming that they are wholly private. Based on the recent history of the steel and aluminum industries, China's non-market distortions in these newer sectors will likely result in oversupply, leading to loss of jobs and production in market economies and, in some cases, less choice, lower quality, less innovation and higher prices for consumers over time.

Over the past two years, the non-market excess capacity that emanates from China's state-led industrial plans has taken center stage. At present, we are seeing non-market excess capacity emerge in more and more Chinese industries in a dynamic that economists are labeling "China Shock 2.0." Faced with an acute crisis in the real estate sector and struggling manufacturers coming out of the COVID pandemic, governments at all levels in China have increased their financial and regulatory support for manufacturers in traditional industries like steel, household appliances, fertilizers and machine tools as well as for manufacturers in emerging, high technology industries. These interventions have led to production well in excess of domestic demand in many sectors – and, in some sectors, such as solar, three or four times the level of global demand. In all of these sectors, with domestic demand in China remaining weak, a wide range of low-priced manufactured goods have been flooding export markets. The flood of exports has also led to many of China's trading partners pursuing import relief through antidumping and countervailing duty investigations. In the steel sector alone, WTO Members launched 67 new antidumping investigations against Chinese imports in the first 10 months of 2024.

Not unexpectedly, in recent years, China has accounted for the largest annual global trade surpluses in the history of the world, as China's exports have far exceeded China's imports. In 2024, with China Shock 2.0 under way, China reached another new record, with a global trade surplus of nearly $1 trillion. This global trade surplus is more than 16 percent higher than China's global trade surplus in 2023, when China's global trade surplus was more than three times the total for the country with the next largest global trade surplus, Russia.

Despite its past acknowledgements of excess capacity problems, China's response during China Shock 2.0 has shifted to one of denial, a tactic that China frequently uses in other contexts. China now insists that none of its industries are experiencing excess capacity. According to China, its enterprises have comparative advantages, and foreign claims of excess capacity are groundless. China argues that Chinese enterprises are dominating markets simply because of their innovation, efficiency and competitiveness. China's rhetoric wholly ignores the artificial competitive advantages provided to Chinese enterprises through China's predatory industrial plans and affirmatively denies that Chinese enterprises even receive subsidies.

China's fantastical rhetoric has not convinced its trading partners. In response to the significant harm being caused by China's excess capacity, the United States and a number of other WTO Members have been resorting to available trade defense tools not only in the steel sector, but also in a range of other industries. Unfortunately, these trade defense tools provide protection against only some of the harm caused by China's excess capacity. It is clear that industries, businesses and workers in the United States and other WTO Members continue to be harmed by China's excess capacity, while China itself has not taken any steps to change its behavior.

Another example of the harm that can be caused by China's predatory non-market economic system involves forced or pressured technology transfer. In USTR's investigation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation, USTR issued two extensive factual reports that detailed how the Chinese government uses foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal joint venture requirements, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. The reports also explained how China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. In addition, the reports analyzed how the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese entities to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries targeted in the state's industrial plans. Finally, the reports illustrated how the Chinese government has conducted or supported cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, with the targets being intellectual property and sensitive commercial information held by U.S. firms. While these reports focused on the harm caused to U.S. interests, it is not a problem borne solely by the United States. As in the case of non-market excess capacity, China's unfair policies and practices relating to forced or pressured technology transfer also affect many other WTO Members whose companies have developed or are developing advanced technologies.

Closely related to its pursuit of forced or pressured technology transfer, China also sponsors and engages in the theft of intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information for commercial use. As previously reported, intelligence and law enforcement officials from the Five Eyes countries – Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States – have publicly characterized the Chinese state's sponsorship and pursuit of this type of theft as being on a scale unprecedented in human history. They added that it is the biggest of any country in the world and, indeed, bigger than every other country in the world combined. In the United States alone, in 2023, there were approximately 2,000 active investigations into apparent state-sponsored theft by China covering a diverse array of U.S. industries, from aviation to biotechnology to robotics, among many others. The Five Eyes officials noted that while many other countries engage in clandestine activities for national security purposes, China is different from most of those countries in that the Chinese state steals information and then uses it for commercial advantage.

Plainly, in addition to often being predatory, China's economic approach is far different from the open, market-oriented approach foundational to WTO membership and pursued by the United States and almost all other WTO Members. Key differences include:

China routinely deploys economic and trade policies and practices that promote unfair competition and unlevel playing field, so that state-directed outcomes rather than fair competition and market-based outcomes prevail.

China often does not enable or allow Chinese enterprises to make their own commercial decisions.

China does not treat all enterprises engaged in commercial activities equally or allow the market to determine the allocation of resources.

China does not require its regulatory authorities to administer in a fair, transparent, impartial and reasonable manner all laws, regulations and other measures pertaining to or affecting trade in goods, trade in services, investment and trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights.

China does not maintain an independent judiciary, nor does it publish all laws, regulations and other measures that impact the rights and obligations of enterprises and individuals.

At present, moreover, there are no indications that China is considering taking meaningful steps toward the adoption of the open, market-oriented economic system that the WTO membership has endorsed and expects of all WTO Members. In fact, China continues to take steps designed to increase, not decrease, the role of the Chinese state in the market.

ADDRESSING TODAY'S CHINA CHALLENGE

As has been evident for some time, the WTO has been unable to effectively address China's continued pursuit of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. While some of the non-market policies and practices pursued by China are disciplined by existing WTO rules, resort to WTO dispute settlement has proven ineffective in changing or discouraging China's behavior in any fundamental way. Indeed, for the most part, it has become clear that China's non-market policies and practices are not effectively disciplined by existing WTO rules. When WTO Members developed and agreed on the existing WTO rules, they simply did not contemplate that a WTO Member would ever pursue many of the policies and practices that now emanate from China's predatory non-market economic system. In short, China's approach is fundamentally at odds with the multilateral trading system.

It is now more than two decades since China joined the WTO, and it is clear that China has not lived up to the bargain that it struck with WTO Members when it acceded to the WTO, as recounted in more detail below. With existing WTO disciplines having proved to be ineffective, or simply not designed to discipline many of the types of harmful non-market policies and practices deployed by the Chinese state, it is also clear – and has been clear for some time – that solutions independent of the WTO are needed. While the WTO can still play a role in addressing certain aspects of the unique challenge that China poses for the global trading community, the United States believes, realistically, that other strategies are needed. For that reason, the United States has been pursuing a multi-faceted approach that accounts for the current realities in the U.S.-China trade relationship and the many problems that China generates for the United States and other trading partners, both now and likely in the future.

This is the approach that the United States has been pursuing for the past four years. As described in more detail in past reports, this strategy has included (1) the pursuit of enhanced domestic investment in key industries, (2) bilateral engagement of China, (3) the deployment of domestic trade tools and (4) close coordination with allies and partners. Today, this strategy is working, but it needs to be refined and fortified. In particular, with China's strong embrace of predatory behavior, it is apparent that the U.S. strategy needs to evolve, particularly with regard to the deployment of domestic trade tools and with regard to the United States' work with allies and partners.

DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

The United States has been working to ensure that we are taking the steps domestically to invest in, and build policies supportive of, the industries of today and tomorrow. We therefore have been working to strengthen our economy, our supply chains, our infrastructure, our businesses, our farmers and our workers and to lay a solid foundation for us to continue to innovate and maintain our technological edge. Important steps taken to date include the passage of the CHIPS and Science Act, the Inflation Reduction Act and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as well as the many subsequent steps taken in implementing those Acts. All of these steps are helping to ensure and accelerate the development of sectors that are important to the future of the U.S. economy, and more can be done.

Some observers have criticized these efforts as the United States resorting to the same industrial policy that it condemns China for pursuing. However, these criticisms miss the mark on two basic counts. First, when compared to the industrial policies of other WTO Members, China's industrial policy is fundamentally different. As is explained in more detail below, China's industrial policy goes well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries in several significant ways, including through their predatory schemes, led by the Chinese state.

Second, as economists have explained, a more fundamental point is that when a country like China with its large economy advances an aggressive industrial policy pursuing dominant market shares in a targeted industry, other countries have a policy choice to make. A country's decision to do nothing is a policy choice, and it effectively becomes the country's industrial policy, meaning that the country has decided to accept the broad, negative changes to its own industry that inevitably will be caused by China's industrial policy.

In other words, if the United States and other WTO Members do not respond with their own affirmative industrial policies, the unfair competition and unlevel playing field that China creates and the successes that Chinese enterprises achieve will result in industries, businesses and workers in the United States and China's other trading partners bearing the costs of China's industrial policy. As economists regularly point out, the massive and relentless subsidization of manufacturing in China – a key component of any Chinese industrial plan – comes at the expense of households in China, who in effect fund the subsidies, and this dynamic leads to reduced domestic consumption in China and focuses Chinese manufacturers more on export markets around the world, where they are determined to make sales at virtually any price. Inevitably, competing manufacturers in the United States and other WTO Members lose significant income to their Chinese competition, which undermines their profitability and can put them out of business and their workers out of jobs. It can also devastate whole communities.

BILATERAL ENGAGEMENT

It is clear that bilateral engagement with China, even while it continues, has not been leading to significant changes in China's economic and trade policies and practices, nor have we seen any indication that China is even considering any significant changes. Nevertheless, continued bilateral engagement is important, at a minimum so that channels of communication can remain open and misunderstandings can be avoided.

In addition to periodic high-level discussions, the United States has been closely monitoring the progress that China has made in implementing its commitments under the Phase One Agreement, which entered into force in February 2020. The United States has also been utilizing the consultation arrangements set forth in the agreement, including meetings and other communications between the two sides. Through these many engagements, the United States has raised various concerns that have arisen regarding China's implementation progress. At present, serious ongoing concerns with China's implementation efforts persist in several areas covered by the agreement, including intellectual property, technology transfer and agriculture. In addition, official trade data appears to show that China fell far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services, which covered the years 2020 and 2021.

Meanwhile, it bears noting that, despite China's rhetoric, the United States does not view a bilateral "decoupling" from China as the solution to the many problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. Indeed, if the United States were to decouple from China, it would not address those problems. The United States has taken targeted actions, including on export controls and outbound investment, to protect our national security, consistent with our approach to the U.S.-China economic and trade relationship, which is more appropriately characterized as one of de-risking and diversifying, not decoupling. Because the Chinese government continually intervenes in the market and actively seeks to advantage Chinese enterprises and disadvantage foreign enterprises, the United States is not in a position to rely on the good will of the Chinese state when it comes to supply chains, especially for critical minerals. Similarly, U.S. companies with operations in China are not able to have confidence that they will be treated fairly by the Chinese state, and they increasingly are re-evaluating the degree of their dependence on the China market.

Nevertheless, the United States still seeks to trade with China, just as the United States seeks to do with other countries. But the terms of competition must be fair. U.S. companies and workers need to be able to compete on a level playing field with Chinese companies and workers, whether in the China market, the U.S. market or other markets around the world. For two-way trade to expand, both the United States and China need to be committed to it. But questions remain about China's commitment, as China itself appears to be pursuing a decoupling strategy – and not just from the United States.

In this regard, China's "dual circulation" strategy, in place since 2020, touts the importance of China continuing to participate in international trade, while simultaneously seeking to become self-sufficient domestically. What this means in reality is that, for now, China will continue to export to the world (often at predatory prices), including the negative externalities from its industrial policies, and China will continue to welcome foreign companies operating in China and continue to import products needed by Chinese companies, especially in technology products. However, once Chinese companies are capable of displacing the foreign competition in any particular industry in the China market, the Chinese state will no longer welcome foreign companies and their products.

Whatever term might best describe China's "dual circulation" strategy, it is plainly not a strategy ever envisioned by, or condoned by, the WTO membership. The autarky that this strategy envisions runs counter to the WTO's goal of developing an integrated, more viable and durable multilateral trading system. In other words, this strategy is best viewed as further evidence of China's broader intent to re-shape the international order and move the world away from rules-based engagement premised on market-based competition.

The United States, in contrast, remains committed to the WTO and the shared values upon which it is based, including openness, fair competition, non-discrimination, reciprocity and transparency as well as adherence to the rule of law. But serious challenges threaten those core values, most notably the challenge posed by the policies and practices that emanate from China's state-led, non-market – and predatory – approach to the economy and trade.

DOMESTIC TRADE TOOLS

The use of domestic trade tools is also a key focus of U.S. trade policy toward China. To the extent that China's unfair, non-market and distortive policies and practices persist, the United States is prepared to use domestic trade tools strategically as needed in order to achieve a more level playing field with China for U.S. workers and businesses.

It is also apparent that existing trade tools need to be strengthened, and new trade tools need to be forged. As discussed above, China's approach to trade has evolved into economic predation. It pursues unfair and anticompetitive policies and practices targeting key industries for domination. Recognizing that the scope and extent of this behavior simply was not contemplated when U.S. trade laws were enacted decades ago, we have been exploring ways in which to work with the Congress to update our trade tools to counter this behavior.

ALLIES AND PARTNERS

Despite the size of the U.S. economy, there are limits to the impact of U.S. domestic trade tools alone. That is why the United States has been working more intensely, strategically and broadly with allies and partners. We have been strengthening this coordination with our trading partners in order to more effectively address the challenges that China poses for the global economy.

As more and more U.S. allies and partners come to understand the need for new approaches for dealing with China and its non-market policies and practices, the United States is working more intensely and broadly with them, both in existing international trade fora and initiatives and in new ones. The COVID-19 pandemic, followed by Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, and their impacts on supply chains and global economic conditions, have laid bare the vulnerabilities and interdependencies of economies around the world and have underscored the need to build up economic security and resiliency across sectors. The concentration of supply chains in China remains a particular problem, especially in light of the many serious risks and potential harms that emanate from China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. There is a strong need for new thinking and new coalitions of allies and partners, including not only on a bilateral basis ― especially with major trading partners ― but also regionally and multilaterally, to find global solutions to the many serious problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

Importantly, among many of the United States' key trading partners, there appears to be a convergence of thinking about the need to approach trade relations with China with more realism, as the United States has been doing. The most significant factor in this convergence of thinking is the incontrovertible evidence of the significant harm being caused by China's embrace of an increasingly predatory non-market economic system. Indeed, this harm is not confined to the advanced market economies, as emerging and developing economies tend to be particularly adversely impacted by China's non-market policies and practices. At the same time, many of our trading partners are also seeing that, as the United States grows more determined to mitigate the harms of China's non-market policies and practices, those harms may increasingly flow instead to other economies.

China's increased use of economic coercion in recent years has certainly also played a role in this convergence of thinking. As its economic power and leverage has grown, China has attempted to weaponize the economic dependencies that have developed in order to pressure other countries to adopt or maintain policies in China's favor or to punish other countries for policies that offend China. In particular, the Chinese government more and more has resorted to the threat or use of measures affecting trade and investment in an abusive, arbitrary or pretextual manner to pressure, induce or influence a foreign government into taking, or not taking, a decision or action in order to achieve a strategic political or policy objective, or to prevent or interfere with the foreign government's exercise of its legitimate sovereign rights or choices. It is particularly troubling to witness an authoritarian government using economic coercion to influence the policies being pursued by democratic countries.

As previously reported, the United States has been working with allies and partners through a variety of initiatives in recent years. This work is taking place in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora, including the WTO. Several of these initiatives have involved the European Union (EU) and Japan.

In 2021, the United States and the EU established the Trade and Technology Council, where one important component of the regular engagement under this initiative seeks to better understand and develop strategies for addressing non-market policies and practices. To date, these discussions have focused on the clean energy and medical device sectors. Separately, since the establishment of the Working Group on Large Civil Aircraft in 2022, the United States and the EU have also met regularly at the working level to explore strategies for confronting the challenges posed by China's non-market policies and practices in the aviation sector. Meanwhile, the United States and Japan have established a bilateral initiative, known as the Partnership for Trade, where China's non-market policies and practices are also a key focus.

Over the past four years, the United States, the EU and Japan have also continued their trilateral work, focusing on the identification of problems arising from non-market policies and practices, including in sectors such as legacy semiconductor chips. The three trading partners have also sought to identify gaps in existing trade tools and where further work is needed to develop new trade tools to address non-market policies and practices, as well as possible cooperation in utilizing existing tools.

Similar work continues to take place in fora such as the Group of Seven (G7), the Group of Twenty (G20) and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). For example, at the G7 Leaders' Meeting held in June 2024, the United States and the other members of the G7 discussed the challenges that China's persistent industrial targeting and comprehensive non-market policies and practices pose to our workers, industries, and economic resilience and security. They reaffirmed their commitment to work together to address harmful market distortions and global excess capacity in key sectors resulting from non-market policies and practices. They also specifically committed to pursue joint monitoring to assess how non-market policies and practices are producing harmful effects, including excess capacity.

The United States has also been holding discussions with many other like-minded trading partners, including in the Indo-Pacific region, on how to strengthen our existing trade relationships. Given that trade with China poses so many serious risks and potential harms, the United States believes that market economies should enhance their trade with each other.

As part of its discussions with like-minded trading partners, the United States has also been working to make critical supply chains less vulnerable and more resilient – that is, more sustainable, secure, diverse, and transparent. The United States recognizes the need to cooperate with trading partners to diversify international suppliers and reduce geographic concentration risk, especially in China, and to address vulnerabilities that can result in shortages of key goods. This joint work can also enable more effective responses to non-market policies and practices that have eroded critical supply chains. Reducing geographic concentration also reduces opportunities for economic coercion while contributing to a more stable and secure trading environment.

INTRODUCTION

In this report, we first provide a broad assessment of China's WTO membership to date. Next, we discuss past strategies that have been used, without success, in an attempt to address the many problems that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade creates for the United States and other WTO Members. We then summarize the nature of the China challenge as it exists today. Lastly, we catalogue, on a topic-by-topic basis, the many specific trade concerns generated by China's outlier behavior.

ASSESSMENT OF CHINA'S WTO MEMBERSHIP

In assessing China's WTO membership below, we first recall the terms of China's accession to the WTO. As explained below, these terms included commitments to adhere to the rules and principles set forth in the WTO agreements as well as an unprecedented number of China-specific commitments intended to facilitate China's intended transition to a market economy. These terms also included an expectation that China would pursue an open and market-oriented approach to the economy and trade, like other WTO Members. After reviewing the terms of China's accession to the WTO, we then review China's record of compliance, which has been poor.

CHINA'S WTO ACCESSION

In July of 1986, China applied for admission to the WTO's predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The GATT formed a Working Party in March of 1987, composed of all interested GATT contracting parties, to examine China's application and negotiate terms for China's accession. For the next eight years, negotiations were conducted under the auspices of the GATT Working Party. Following the formation of the WTO on January 1, 1995, pursuant to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), a successor WTO Working Party, composed of all interested WTO Members, took over the negotiations.

Like all WTO accession negotiations, the negotiations with China had three basic aspects. First, China provided information to the Working Party regarding its trade regime. China also updated this information periodically during the 15 years of negotiations to reflect changes in its trade regime. Second, each interested WTO Member negotiated bilaterally with China regarding market access concessions and commitments in the goods and services areas, including, for example, the tariffs that would apply on industrial and agricultural goods and the commitments that China would make to open up its market to foreign services suppliers. The most trade liberalizing of the concessions and commitments obtained through these bilateral negotiations were consolidated into China's Goods and Services Schedules and apply to all WTO Members. Third, overlapping in time with these bilateral negotiations, China engaged in multilateral negotiations with Working Party members on the rules that would govern trade with China. Throughout these multilateral negotiations, U.S. leadership in working with China was critical to removing obstacles to China's WTO accession and achieving a consensus on appropriate rules commitments. These commitments are set forth in China's Protocol of Accession and an accompanying Report of the Working Party.

WTO Members formally approved an agreement on the terms of accession for China on November 10, 2001, at the WTO's Fourth Ministerial Conference, held in Doha, Qatar. One day later, China signed the agreement and deposited its instrument of ratification with the Director-General of the WTO. China became the 143rd member of the WTO on December 11, 2001. China's Protocol of Accession, accompanying Working Party Report and Goods and Services Schedules are available on the WTO's website (www.wto.org).

To accede to the WTO, China agreed to take concrete steps to remove trade barriers and open its markets to foreign companies and their exports from the first day of accession in virtually every product sector and for a wide range of services. Supporting these steps, China also agreed to undertake important changes to its legal framework, designed to add transparency and predictability to business dealings.

Like all acceding WTO Members, China also agreed to assume the obligations of more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements. Areas of principal concern to the United States and China's other trading partners, as evidenced by the accession negotiations, included core principles of the WTO, such as most-favored nation treatment, national treatment, transparency and the availability of independent review of administrative decisions. Other key concerns arose in the areas of agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, trade-related investment measures, customs valuation, rules of origin, import licensing, antidumping, subsidies and countervailing measures, trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights and services. For some of its obligations, China was allowed minimal transition periods, where it was considered necessary.

Through its membership in the WTO, China also became subject to the same expectations as other WTO Members, as set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, among other things, WTO Members expressly affirmed their view that the WTO Member economies would participate in the international trading system based on "open, market-oriented policies."

Even though the terms of China's accession agreement are directed at the opening of China's market to WTO Members, China's accession agreement also includes provisions designed to address issues related to any injury that U.S. or other WTO Members' industries and workers might experience based on import surges or unfair trade practices, particularly during what was envisioned to be a time of transition for China from a non-market economy to a market economy. These mechanisms include: (1) a special textile safeguard mechanism (which expired on December 11, 2008, seven years after China's WTO accession); (2) a unique, China-specific safeguard mechanism allowing a WTO Member to take action against increasing Chinese imports that disrupt its market (which expired on December 11, 2013, 12 years after China's WTO accession); (3) an expression of the ability of WTO Members to use an antidumping methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market economy conditions prevail in the industry producing the like product with regard to the manufacture, production and sale of that product; and (4) an expression of the ability to use methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits to Chinese enterprises that are not based on terms and conditions prevailing in China.

With China's consent, the WTO also created a special multilateral mechanism for reviewing China's compliance on an annual basis. Known as the Transitional Review Mechanism, this mechanism operated annually for eight years after China's accession. A final review, looking back over the first 10 years of China's WTO membership, took place in 2011.

EXPECTATIONS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP

For all WTO Members, the expectations of WTO membership are clearly set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, WTO Members expressly affirmed their view that the establishment of the WTO ushers in a "new era of global economic cooperation" that "reflect[s] the widespread desire to operate in a fairer and more open multilateral trading system." WTO Members further made clear their determination that their economies would participate in the international trading system, based on both "open, market-oriented policies" and "the commitments set out in the Uruguay Round Agreements and Decisions."

As this language makes clear, it was not contemplated that any WTO Member would reject market-based policies in favor of a state-led trade regime. It also was not contemplated that any WTO Member would pursue mercantilist outcomes instead of policies promoting a fairer and more open multilateral trading system. Rather, it was expected that each WTO Member would pursue open, market-oriented policies. The pursuit of open, market-oriented policies means not only adhering to the agreed rules but also observing in good faith the fundamental principles that run throughout the many WTO agreements, which include non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency.

When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and embed it in its trading system and institutions. Through China's commitments and representations, WTO Members understood that China intended to dismantle existing state-led, mercantilist policies and practices, and they expected China to continue on its then-existing path of economic reform and successfully complete a transformation to a market-oriented economy and trade regime.

China's protocol of accession to the WTO sets out China's obligations under the WTO agreements as well as numerous additional China-specific commitments made necessary because of the need for China to transform its approach to the economy and trade. China itself acknowledged "the evolving nature of its economy," and it confirmed that "a socialist market economy system was applied" in China. Similarly, WTO Members highlighted that "China was continuing the process of transition towards a full market economy." WTO Members noted, for example, that "the special features of China's economy, in its present state of reform, still created the potential for a certain level of trade-distorting subsidization."

For these reasons, it was agreed that special safeguard-like provisions would be included among the terms of China's protocol of accession as protective measures while China completed its transformation into a market economy. As noted above, for example, China's protocol of accession included a China-specific safeguard mechanism, special antidumping rules and special methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits. It also created a unique, 10-year review mechanism designed to monitor China's progress in implementing its many WTO commitments and to secure updated information on the use of industrial plans by China.

CHINA'S WTO COMPLIANCE RECORD

As has been catalogued in prior reports, China has a poor record when it comes to complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based − non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. Too often, China flouts the rules to achieve industrial domination objectives. In addition, and of serious concern to the United States and other WTO Members, China has not made sufficient progress in transitioning toward a market economy. More specifically, China continues to embrace a state-led, non-market and mercantilist approach to the economy and trade, and in recent years this approach has become largely predatory in nature. Unfortunately, this approach also results in sophisticated and expansive policies and practices that often evade effective WTO disciplines and cause serious harm to markets, workers and industries in the United States and other WTO Members. At the same time, China has used the benefits of WTO membership – including its guarantee of open, non-discriminatory access to the markets of other WTO Members – to become the WTO's largest trader, while resisting calls for further liberalization of its trade regime by claiming to be a "developing" country.

ADOPTION OF MARKET-ORIENTED POLICIES

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of transitioning to a market economy has not changed. More than two decades after its accession to the WTO, China has still not embraced open, market-oriented policies. Instead, the state's already sizable role continues to grow, not recede. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve industrial policy objectives, which are anticompetitive and often predatory in nature.

As we detailed in prior reports, China pursues a wide array of continually evolving interventionist policies and practices. It offers substantial government guidance, resources and regulatory support to domestic industries, including China's state-owned enterprises and numerous other domestic companies. At the same time, it also seeks to limit market access for imported goods and services and restrict the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China in various ways. The benefits that China's industries realize from these non-market policies and practices largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their workers and companies, as markets all over the world are distorted, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

This situation has worsened over the past decade. Since new leaders assumed power in China in 2013, the state's role in the economy – effectuated by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the CCP – has grown. While China has repeatedly signaled in recent years that it is pursuing "economic reform," China's concept of "economic reform" differs from the type of change that a country would be pursuing if it were embracing open, market-oriented policies. For China, "economic reform" appears to mean deepening the management of the economy by the government and the Party and strengthening state-owned and state-invested enterprises. Meanwhile, as the state's role in the economy has increased in recent years, the depth and breadth of challenges facing U.S. and other foreign companies doing business in China – or competing with favored Chinese companies in markets outside of China – have similarly increased.

To fully appreciate the challenges presented by China's predatory non-market economy, it is vital to understand the extent to which the state still maintains control over economic decision-making in China. As we catalogued in prior reports, a thorough examination of China's Constitution, relevant directives and pronouncements by China's leadership, legislative and regulatory measures issued by the Chinese government, China's industrial plans and the actions of the Chinese government and the CCP leave no doubt that the state maintains a tight grip on virtually all economic activity. Indeed, the government and the Party have constitutional mandates to develop a "socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics." To fulfill these mandates, the framework of China's economy is set by the government and the Party, which exercise control directly and indirectly over the allocation of resources through instruments such as government ownership and control of key economic actors and innumerable government directives. The government and the Party also direct and channel economic actors to meet the state's planning targets. The government and the Party permit market forces to operate only to the extent that they accord with China's industrial policy objectives, which typically target industries for domination by Chinese companies. When there is conflict between market outcomes and the state's objectives, the government and the Party intervene to ensure that the state's objectives prevail.

Aside from the role of the government and the Party in managing the economy, there are also serious concerns over how the government and the Party exercise influence over the operations and investment decisions of state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private enterprises, including foreign-invested enterprises. This influence continues to grow, as the Party is increasing its control over key actors in China's economy and not, as had been hoped, enabling China's transition to a market economy.

China claims that its state-owned and state-invested enterprises make business decisions independently of the state and based on market principles. However, the government and the Party continue to exercise control over state-owned and state-invested enterprises. Among other things, they appoint and control key executives through the Chinese Communist Party Organization Department. They also provide state-owned and state-invested enterprises with preferential access to important inputs (such as land and capital) and other competitive advantages unavailable to private Chinese companies. State-owned and state-invested enterprises, in turn, play an outsized role in China's economy. For example, state-owned and state-invested enterprises outstrip private Chinese companies in terms of their share of total credit, their market dominance in key industries and their share of total market capitalization on China's stock market.

Both state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies also host internal Party committees capable of exercising government and Party influence over their corporate governance and business decisions. This arrangement is codified in Chinese law under Article 19 of the Company Law, which applies to both state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies. In recent years, moreover, the Party has taken steps to increase the strength and presence of Party committees within all of these companies. For example, state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies are being pressured to amend their articles of association to ensure Party representation on their boards of directors, usually as the Chairman of the Board, and to ensure that important company decisions are made in consultation with Party cells.

Increasingly in recent years, China has also taken "golden shares" in large private Chinese companies. Under this type of arrangement, the Chinese government via a government guidance fund or other state-backed entity purchases a small stake in the company in exchange for a seat on the board of directors or veto rights. The result is stronger Chinese government oversight and control of the company's operations.

As we explained in prior reports, U.S. industry associations report that the Party is also taking steps to influence the managerial and investment decisions of foreign-invested enterprises in China through the insertion of Party cells. According to these reports, these efforts, in some cases, are beginning to affect the decision-making processes of some Chinese-foreign joint ventures in China.

Further reinforcing the Party's influence over enterprises in China is the Social Credit System, a tool endorsed by the Party that the government is increasingly using to monitor, rate and condition not only the conduct of all individuals in China, but also all domestic and foreign companies in China. This system has become operational, but so far there is no fully integrated national system for assigning comprehensive social credit scores for companies, and the social credit system remains highly fragmented, as local governments experiment with their own pilot social credit schemes. In any event, it appears that the government will use the threat of poor ratings and corresponding adverse consequences under the Social Credit System, among other things, to ensure that all economic actors in China operate in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives and do not cross political redlines on sensitive matters like human rights.

Separate from these various mechanisms used to control company behavior, the government and the Party continue to control or otherwise influence the prices of key factors of production. The result is that the means of production in China are not allocated or priced according to market principles. For example, all land in China is property of the state, as either state-owned urban land or collectively owned rural land. The state also exerts a high degree of control over energy and other input prices. In addition, there are significant institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management, contrary to International Labor Organization principles. China denies workers the right of association and the right to organize and collectively bargain. China prohibits the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, and workers do not have the legal right to strike, which is an important lever in collective action and negotiation with management over wages in market economies. In addition, government restrictions on labor mobility continue to inhibit and guide labor flows, causing distortions on the supply side of the labor market.

The government and the Party also exercise strong control over the financial sector. Five large commercial banks that are majority state-owned entities operate large branch networks on a nationwide basis and account for nearly half of total commercial bank assets. There are also three large state-owned policy banks, as well as scores of city commercial banks and credit unions under local government control. In addition to the ownership of these banks by the government, the state exercises other forms of influence over banking decisions. The Party, through its Organization Department, appoints executives in state-owned banks and other state-owned financial institutions. China's central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), also meets frequently with large banks in China to ensure that their lending decisions align with PBOC and government objectives. In addition, the Law on Commercial Banks provides that "commercial banks are to conduct their business of lending in accordance with the needs of national economic and social development and under the guidance of the industrial policies of the state."

Similarly, China's legal system continues to function as an instrument by which the government and the Party can secure discrete economic outcomes, channel broader economic policy and pursue the state's industrial policy objectives. Key legal institutions, such as the courts, are structured to respond to the Party's direction, both broadly and on a case-specific basis. As a general matter, to the extent that companies and individuals seek to act independently of government or Party direction, the legal system does not provide a venue for them to achieve these objectives on a systemic or consistent basis. In addition, companies and individuals continue to face challenges in obtaining impartial outcomes, either because of local protectionism or corruption.

The larger issue of China's restrictions on the freedom of information also impacts China's economic system. For example, while China's Internet firewall and the Party's regular censorship of audio-visual and print media have many negative effects outside China's economic system, they also create distortions in China's economy, and these distortions affect the ability of foreign companies to operate and compete effectively in China's market.

In March 2021, China finalized and issued the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) for National Economic and Social Development, which runs from 2021 through 2025. Like its predecessor, the 14th Five-year Plan covers all sectors of China's economy and is not limited to one overarching plan, but instead will include hundreds of sub-plans. In this regard, various institutions participate in plan formulation and execution, including central government bodies with legislative and regulatory authority, thousands of provincial and local government authorities, various organs of the Party and key Chinese companies.

When compared to the industrial plans of other WTO Members, China's industrial plans are not merely more extensive. They are also fundamentally different in kind. In several significant ways, China's industrial plans go well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries:

First, adherence to the objectives of China's industrial plans is effectively mandatory. Chinese companies have little discretion to ignore them, even when market forces would dictate different commercial behavior.

Second, the financial support that the state provides to domestic industries in pursuit of China's industrial plan objectives is massive, both in terms of absolute value and in relation to the size of the targeted industry, and it is also relentless and highly market-distorting. Indeed, this financial support is provided on a scale never before seen in the world, and much of it is not transparently provided. As previously noted, this financial support often leads to severe excess capacity in China – followed by China's widespread dumping of the inevitable excess production into the markets of other WTO Members, which not only depresses global prices but also distorts investment decisions by market actors in markets around the world. This assault on global markets causes serious harm to other WTO Members' industries, companies and workers, while the WTO does not provide effective mechanisms for addressing this problem.

Third, China's industrial planning is more comprehensive and complex than in any other country, as it is made up of hundreds of plans across industries and at all levels of government.

Fourth, China's approach to industrial planning is often predatory in nature. As a result, in pursuing its industrial plan objectives, the state goes well beyond merely guiding or supporting the development of domestic industries. The state actively seeks to impede, disadvantage and harm the foreign competition by skewing the playing field against imported goods and services and foreign manufacturers and services suppliers. Indeed, the state actively targets entire industries for domination by Chinese companies, often by explicitly setting market share goals that it pursues through a wide array of non-market policies and practices.

When combined with the large size of China's economy and China's large share of global trade, the policies and practices that China pursues in support of its industrial plans and their often predatory objectives transform China into a unique and pressing challenge for the United States and other market economies as well as for the WTO and the multilateral trading system. Moreover, this troubling situation is not static. China continues to develop and implement new policies and practices to maintain and enhance the state's control over the economy and trade.

COMPLIANCE WITH WTO RULES

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based has not changed. China's record remains poor.

As we detailed in prior reports, China's economic and trade regime has generated many WTO compliance concerns over the years. Too often, WTO Members have had to resort to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to change problematic Chinese policies and practices. The United States, for example, has brought 27 cases against China at the WTO covering a wide range of important policies and practices, such as: (1) discriminatory requirements in the automobile sector; (2) discriminatory taxes in the integrated circuit sector; (3) hundreds of prohibited subsidies in a wide range of manufacturing sectors; (4) inadequate intellectual property rights enforcement in the copyright area; (5) significant market access barriers in copyright-intensive industries; (6) severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of financial information services; (7) export restraints on numerous raw materials; (8) a denial of market access for foreign suppliers of electronic payment services; (9) repeated improper use of trade remedies; (10) excessive domestic support for key agricultural commodities; (11) the opaque and protectionist administration of tariff-rate quotas for key agricultural commodities; and (12) discriminatory regulations on technology licensing. Even though the United States prevailed in these WTO disputes, as other WTO Members have done in their disputes against China, they take years to litigate, consume significant resources and often require further efforts when China fails to comply with WTO rules.

In addition, China has often taken steps to obscure its actions to make it more difficult for trading partners to even challenge them in the WTO's adjudicative system. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism was designed to facilitate the resolution of disagreements over whether an action breaches a WTO obligation, but where the action is so obscured that it is difficult to demonstrate it as a factual matter, the dispute settlement mechanism can fail to be an effective disciplinary tool. In this regard, as USTR has explained in prior reports, China disregards many of its WTO transparency obligations, which places its trading partners at a disadvantage and often serves as a cloak for China to conceal unfair, non-market and distortive trade policies and practices from scrutiny.

For example, during the first 15 years of its WTO membership, China failed to notify any sub-central government subsidies to the WTO, despite the fact that most subsidies in China are provided by provincial and local governments. The magnitude and significance of this problem is illustrated by the five WTO cases that the United States has brought challenging prohibited subsidies maintained by China. While those cases involved hundreds of subsidies, most of the subsidies were provided by sub-central governments. The United States was able to bring those cases only because of its own extensive investigatory efforts to uncover China's opaque subsidization practices. Most other WTO Members lack the resources to conduct the same types of investigations.

Despite these efforts, China continues to shield massive government subsidies from the scrutiny of other WTO Members, at both the central and the sub-central level of government. For example, as the United States and several other WTO Members have complained, China is obscuring massive central government and sub-central government subsidies provided through a vehicle known as "government guidance funds." While China claims that these government guidance funds are wholly private, the facts plainly reveal that the funds are run by government agencies and state-owned enterprises and provide state capital to Chinese companies, and the amounts of funding involved are staggering. According to one estimate, the monies available through these government guidance funds total more than $900 billion.

Together with other complementary non-market practices, the massive and relentless subsidization provided by China's central government and sub-central governments severely distorts global markets. It also contributes to the serious excess capacity problems that have been plaguing industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fisheries and have been devastating foreign competitors. Similar results can be expected in other industries now being targeted by China for dominance.

In sum, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism has not been effective in addressing the serious issues that arise from a WTO Member's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade that systematically disadvantages that Member's trading partners and broadly conflicts with the fundamental, market-oriented underpinnings of the WTO system. The value of the dispute settlement mechanism is also undermined where a WTO Member does not operate in good faith. As a result, over time, despite the enforcement efforts of the United States and other WTO Members, China was able to continue to pursue its predatory non-market policies and practices, which WTO rules and the dispute settlement mechanism have proven unable to discipline effectively.

WTO-FOCUSED ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS

For many years following China's accession to the WTO, a variety of bilateral and multilateral efforts were pursued by the United States and other WTO Members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. However, even though these efforts were persistent, they did not result in meaningful changes in China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

The United States itself pursued a dual track approach in an effort to resolve the many concerns that arose in our trade relationship with China. One track involved using high-level bilateral dialogues, and the other track focused on enforcement at the WTO.

The United States approached its bilateral dialogues with China in good faith and put a great deal of effort into them. These dialogues were intended to push China toward complying with and internalizing WTO rules and principles and making necessary market-oriented changes. However, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States did secure broad commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but China repeatedly failed to follow through on them. Moreover, over time, commitments from China became more difficult to secure.

Meanwhile, at the WTO, the United States brought 27 cases against China, often in collaboration with like-minded WTO Members. The United States secured victories in every one of its cases that was decided. Other WTO Members were also successful in many cases that they brought against China. Still, even when China changed the specific practices that had been challenged, it did not typically change the underlying policies, and meaningful reforms by China remained elusive.

As has become clear, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is of only limited value in addressing a situation where a WTO Member is dedicated to a state-led economic and trade regime that prevails over market forces. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is designed to address good faith disputes in which one Member believes that another Member has adopted a measure or taken an action that breaches a WTO obligation. This mechanism is not designed to address a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system. No amount of WTO dispute settlement by other WTO Members would be sufficient to remedy this systemic problem. Indeed, many of the most harmful policies and practices being pursued by China are not even directly disciplined by WTO rules.

Overreaching by the WTO's Appellate Body in deciding WTO dispute settlement cases has also shielded China's non-market policies and practices from discipline and has affirmatively undermined the efforts of the United States and other WTO Members to protect our workers and businesses from the harmful impacts of China's predatory non-market economic system. The Appellate Body's erroneous substantive interpretations have undermined core values, such as the ability to protect workers and businesses from non-market economic harms, to promote democracy and human rights or to protect human health or the environment. At the same time, China has sought to use the WTO dispute settlement system to subject U.S. national security measures to review, pursuing a strategy that would convert the WTO into a permanent venue for national security disagreements. As a result, the United States has been clear that fundamental reform is needed to ensure a well-functioning WTO dispute settlement system that supports WTO Members in the resolution of their disputes and in doing so limits the needless complexity and interpretive overreach seen in recent years. Among the objectives for reform, the United States has been clear that the dispute settlement system should preserve the policy space in WTO rules for WTO Members to address their critical societal interests and to support, rather than undermine, the WTO's role as a forum for discussion and negotiation. Most critically, fundamental reform must ensure that the WTO respects the essential security interests of WTO Members, including the United States.

Over the years, in addition to pursuing WTO dispute settlement cases, the United States has actively participated in meetings at the WTO addressing China's adherence to its WTO obligations. For example, the United States took on a leading role in the numerous China-specific Transitional Review Mechanism meetings from 2002 through 2011, which involved annual meetings of most WTO committees and councils. However, China consistently approached these meetings in ways that frustrated WTO Members' efforts to secure a meaningful assessment of China's compliance efforts. The United States also raised, as it continues to do, China-related issues at regular meetings of WTO committees and councils, including the WTO's General Council. Among other things, the United States sought to highlight how China's trade-disruptive economic model works, the costs that it exacts from other WTO Members and the benefits that China receives from it. While these efforts raised awareness among WTO Members, they did not lead to meaningful changes in China's approach to the economy and trade.

In theory, the WTO membership could have adopted new rules expressly requiring members like China to abandon non-market economic systems and state-led, mercantilist trade regimes. For two basic reasons, however, Members have not pursued any negotiation of new WTO rules that would change China's problematic approach to the economy and trade in a meaningful way.

First, new WTO rules disciplining China would require agreement among all WTO Members, including China. China has shown no willingness at the WTO to consider fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime. Given the extent to which China has benefited and continues to benefit from the current state of affairs, it was not realistic to expect that China would agree to effective new WTO disciplines on its behavior. Indeed, China has been using its WTO membership to develop rapidly – albeit largely in an anticompetitive manner that comes at the expense of others. China is now the second largest economy in the world, and it is also the largest goods trader – and the largest exporter – among WTO Members. It is therefore highly unlikely that China would agree to new WTO disciplines targeted at its policies and practices. In fact, in connection with ongoing discussions at the WTO relating to needed WTO reform, China has stated that it would not alter its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

Second, China has a long record of not pursuing ambitious outcomes at the WTO. Past agreements, even relatively narrow ones, have been difficult to achieve, and even when an agreement is achieved, it is significantly less ambitious because of China's participation.

As these experiences make clear, it is unrealistic to believe that actions at the WTO alone will be sufficient to force or persuade China to make fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime. The WTO's trading system was designed for countries that are truly committed to fair competition based on market principles, not for an economically powerful country determined to maintain a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, and China has demonstrated no willingness to change its approach in any meaningful way.

At the same time, the United States is continuing to pursue initiatives at the WTO. For example, the U.S. agenda at the WTO includes pushing for and building support for meaningful WTO reforms to update the organization and respond to contemporary challenges, including those posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. One U.S. proposal relates to "special and differential treatment," where certain WTO Members rely on self-declared developing country status to inappropriately seek "special and differential treatment" to avoid making meaningful commitments in WTO negotiations. The United States has also offered, and will continue to pursue, a proposal intended to increase consequences for WTO Members who fail to adequately notify industrial subsidies. More recently, the United States has been advocating for the establishment of a workstream broadly focused on state intervention, including an analysis of gaps in existing WTO rules to discipline it.

OTHER ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS

In recent years, it became evident to the United States that new strategies were needed to deal with the many problems generated by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, including solutions independent of the WTO. In one significant action, in August 2017, USTR launched an investigation under the authority of Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation. In March 2018, after a thorough review and analysis of the evidence, USTR issued a detailed report, finding that China had engaged in a range of unfair and harmful conduct:

First, USTR found that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. companies.

Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients.

Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans.

Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information, such as technical data, negotiating positions and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. The purpose of these actions is to support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization and economic development.

Based on these findings, the United States took a range of responsive actions. These actions included the successful prosecution of a WTO dispute settlement case challenging Chinese measures that deny foreign patent holders the ability to enforce their patent rights against a Chinese joint venture partner after a technology transfer contract ends and that impose mandatory adverse contract terms that discriminate against and are less favorable for imported foreign technology as compared to Chinese technology, as well as the imposition of substantial additional tariffs on imports of Chinese goods. Over time, as has been previously reported, these tariffs eventually covered $370 billion of Chinese imports, with additional tariffs of 25 percent on $250 billion of Chinese imports and additional tariffs of 15 percent on a further $120 billion of Chinese imports, while China responded through the imposition of retaliatory tariffs on various imports of U.S. goods.

In December 2019, after one year of negotiations, the United States announced that the two sides had finalized the text of an economic and trade agreement, which was later signed in January 2020. This agreement, commonly referred to as the "Phase One Agreement," included commitments from China on intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, currency and foreign exchange, and the purchase of U.S. goods and services. The commitments varied in ambition, and in effectiveness. For example, some commitments related to financial services reflected reforms that China was already contemplating or pursuing, as China had begun easing foreign investment restrictions in some financial services sectors in 2017. In addition, in the area of intellectual property rights, while China committed to make a number of changes to its laws and regulations, China saw many of these changes as now needed by its domestic businesses, given their own increasing efforts at innovation. It also remains unclear how faithfully and fairly China will actually enforce the changes to its laws and regulations. Meanwhile, other commitments that China made, such as in the area of technology transfer, are difficult to verify given the tactics that China takes to obscure its activities.

Notably, the Phase One Agreement did not address many of the U.S. concerns that the United States had been seeking to address in its negotiations with China. The reality is that the Phase One Agreement did not meaningfully address the more fundamental concerns that the United States has with China's state-led, non-market policies and practices and their harmful impact on the U.S. economy and U.S. workers and businesses. The unresolved issues included critical concerns in areas such as state-led industrial plans targeting industries for dominance, massive and pervasive subsidization, favorable regulatory support for domestic enterprises, state-owned enterprises, non-market excess capacity, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, standards, cybersecurity, data localization requirements, restrictions on cross-border data transfers, competition law enforcement and regulatory transparency as well as certain issues in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer and services market access that were not addressed in the Phase One Agreement. In furtherance of its industrial policy objectives, China's government has also limited market access for imported goods and services and restricted the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China.

In light of the limited progress represented by the Phase One Agreement, the United States at the time did not make major changes to the existing Section 301 tariffs. After some minor adjustments, the United States kept in place tariffs on $370 billion of Chinese imports, which included 25 percent tariffs on $250 billion of Chinese imports and 7.5 percent tariffs on $120 billion of Chinese imports. The United States also decided not to move forward with plans to raise the tariff rate for some of the existing Section 301 tariffs or to impose new tariffs on additional Chinese imports.

Since the Phase One Agreement entered into force in February 2020, the United States has been closely monitoring China's progress in implementing its commitments. The United States has also been utilizing the consultation arrangements set forth in the agreement, including regular meetings required by the agreement between the two sides. Through these many engagements, the United States has raised various concerns that have arisen regarding China's implementation progress. In addition, official trade data appears to show that China fell far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in calendar years 2020 and 2021. Serious concerns with China's implementation efforts have also arisen in other areas, including intellectual property, where China has failed to implement or only partially implemented a number of its commitments, and agriculture, particularly with regard to China's commitments relating to agricultural biotechnology, the risk assessment that China is required to conduct relating to the use of ractopamine in cattle and swine, the registration of U.S. food facilities and trade in U.S. poultry products.

In May 2022, USTR launched a statutorily mandated four-year review of the tariffs that had been imposed on Chinese imports as a result of the Section 301 investigation into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation. As part of this review, USTR examined the effectiveness of the tariff actions in achieving the objectives of the original investigation, other actions that could be taken and the effects of those actions on the United States economy, including consumers. In May 2024, USTR issued a report that found that China's unfair acts, policies and practices had continued and, in some cases, had worsened. USTR also solicited public comments on proposed modifications to the existing Section 301 tariffs. In September 2024, following the issuance of a Presidential directive and after taking into account public comments, USTR announced the final modifications to the tariffs, which maintained the current tariffs in place while selectively increasing tariffs on Chinese imports in certain strategic sectors.

LOOKING AHEAD

As explained above, China's approach to the economy and trade has not moved toward a stronger embrace of open, market-oriented principles and instead has seen a doubling-down on state capitalism "with Chinese characteristics." The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve China's industrial policy objectives, which typically target industries for domination by Chinese companies. Along the way, the state subsidizes industries that would not otherwise form or thrive, directs activities that a private business would not choose to undertake and seeks access to foreign technologies often through nefarious ways, among many other problematic policies and practices.

The evidence is clear, moreover, that when a trading partner with China's size – China is the second largest economy in the world and the largest goods trader among WTO Members – routinely pursues these types of unfair and anticompetitive non-market policies and practices, the distortions that it creates impose substantial costs on its trading partners. The Chinese state's decisions in the marketplace are not driven by market factors, but their effects on markets push U.S. and international companies out of sectors, such as steel, aluminum, solar and fisheries. Once China's dominance is established, barriers to entry can lock-in China's dominance over the long term. As a result, markets all over the world are less fair and well-functioning than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against U.S. and other foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

In the United States, it is widely accepted that the existing WTO rules do not, and cannot, effectively discipline many of China's most harmful policies and practices. It is similarly evident to us that China has become quite adept at circumventing the existing rules, as well as the attempted enforcement of those rules, by obscuring state involvement in the economy in ways that the WTO rules did not anticipate at the time of their negotiation. These problems are exacerbated by China's long record of flouting the transparency obligations that it undertook when it joined the WTO. At the same time, there is no expectation that China would agree to new WTO rules disciplining its problematic behavior. As a result, in the United States' view, while the WTO still has a significant role to play, enforcement of WTO rules has become less significant and solutions independent of the WTO are necessary, including solutions pursued through bilateral engagement and the use of domestic trade tools, to counter the harm caused by China's unfair and anticompetitive policies and practices.

In recent years, it has become apparent that the views of other WTO Members have also been evolving toward the United States' view regarding the limits of the WTO when it comes to addressing the China challenge. While the WTO remains a strong focus for the United States and many of the United States' trading partners, there is a growing awareness that it may be necessary to pursue solutions outside the WTO in order to avoid the severe harm that will likely continue to result from China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime. For example, some of the United States' trading partners are now exploring or adopting possible new domestic trade tools to address the challenges posed by China's state-led trade regime. These and other like-minded trading partners have also begun working with the United States ― sometimes confidentially ― in pursuit of new joint strategies to address China's harmful non-market policies and practices. Many of these same trading partners have also intensified their work on deterring and responding to China's increasing use of economic coercion, including through joint and coordinated strategies.

It is also noteworthy that, in recent years, many of China's trading partners have also become increasingly skeptical of China's rhetoric. For example, China often touts its strong commitment to win-win outcomes in international trade matters, but its actions plainly belie its words.

Through state-led industrial plans like Made in China 2025, which targets 10 strategic emerging sectors, China pursues a zero-sum approach. It first seeks to develop and dominate its domestic markets. Once China develops, acquires or steals new technologies and Chinese enterprises become capable of producing the same quality products in those industries as the foreign competition, the state suppresses the foreign competition domestically and then supports Chinese enterprises as they "go out" and seek dominant positions in global markets. Countries with industries like steel, aluminum, solar and fisheries have experienced this reality, and all WTO Members know that a new wave of severe and persistent non-market excess capacity has begun, to the detriment of their industries, businesses and workers.

In addition, as discussed above, China's "dual circulation" strategy reflects China's goal of becoming self-sufficient domestically. What this means in reality is that, for now, China will continue to export to the world, and China will continue to welcome foreign companies operating in China and continue to import products needed by Chinese companies, especially in technology products. But once Chinese companies are capable of displacing the foreign competition in any particular industry in the China market, the Chinese state will no longer welcome foreign companies and their products.

Meanwhile, as China's economy grew over the years since its accession to the WTO, every country in the world has witnessed China become a regular user of economic coercion, directed not only against foreign companies but also increasingly foreign governments, including in democratic countries. Indeed, China no longer hesitates to take on foreign governments whose policies or practices are perceived to undermine either China's economic and trade interests or China's political interests. China's coercive economic measures in this context have taken a variety of forms, including, for example, import restrictions, export restrictions, restrictions on bilateral investment, regulatory actions, state-led and state-encouraged boycotts, and travel bans. Many countries have been directly subjected to this economic coercion. At the same time, one intended by-product of this economic coercion is broader in scope, as China seeks to create an environment that mutes international objections to China's non-market policies and practices, even when China blatantly flouts the WTO's rules-based international trading system.

Similarly, it has also not gone unnoticed among China's trading partners ― particularly the democratic market economies ― that China's leadership appears confident in its predatory non-market economic system and feels no need to conform to global norms. China's leadership also demonstrates confidence in its ability to quiet dissenting voices. Indeed, it has become increasingly evident that China's leadership is seeking to establish new global norms that better reflect and support not only China's approach to the economy and trade but also China's governance model, providing a potentially attractive alternative for other authoritarian regimes around the world.

As a result, the reality confronting the United States and other WTO Members is not simply that China has chosen to pursue an economic and trade regime that conflicts in significant and harmful ways with the market-oriented approach endorsed by the WTO membership, to the detriment of our workers and businesses. China also does not hold the same core values as other WTO members, especially the democratic market economies. China plainly does not embrace our core values, which, like the fundamental principles of the WTO, include openness, fair competition, non-discrimination, reciprocity and transparency as well as adherence to the rule of law.