2021 USTR Report to Congress on China's WTO Compliance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In Part One of this report, we provide an assessment of China's WTO membership, including the unique and very serious challenges that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade continue to pose for the multilateral trading system. In Part Two, we review the effectiveness of the various strategies that have been pursued over the years to address the unique problems posed by China. In Part Three, we emphasize the critical need for new and more effective strategies – including taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – to address those problems. Finally, in Part Four, we catalogue the numerous problematic policies and practices that currently stem from China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

PART ONE

Part One explains that when China acceded to the WTO, it voluntarily agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and to embed it in China's trading system and institutions. China also agreed to take on the obligations set forth in existing WTO rules, while also making numerous China-specific commitments. As we previously documented, and as remains true today, China's record of compliance with these terms has been poor.

After 20 years of WTO membership, China still embraces a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, despite other WTO members' expectations – and China's own representations – that China would transform its economy and pursue the open, market-oriented policies endorsed by the WTO. In fact, China's embrace of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has increased rather than decreased over time, and the mercantilism that it generates has harmed and disadvantaged U.S. companies and workers, often severely.

China also has a long record of violating, disregarding and evading WTO rules to achieve its industrial policy objectives. In this report, as in our prior reports, we identify and explain numerous unfair, non-market and distortive trade policies and practices used by China in pursuit of its industrial policy objectives. We also describe how China has sought to frustrate WTO oversight mechanisms, such as through its poor record of adhering to its WTO transparency obligations.

PART TWO

As we explain below in Part Two, for nearly two decades following China's accession to the WTO, a variety of bilateral and multilateral efforts were pursued by the United States and other WTO members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. However, even though these efforts were persistent, they did not result in meaningful changes in China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

For many years, the United States pursued a dual track approach in an effort to resolve the many concerns that have arisen in our trade relationship with China. One track involved using high-level bilateral dialogues, and the other track focused on enforcement at the WTO.

The United States approached its bilateral dialogues with China in good faith and put a great deal of effort into them. These dialogues were intended to push China toward complying with and internalizing WTO rules and norms and making other market-oriented changes. However, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States did secure broad commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but these commitments were unenforceable and China repeatedly failed to follow through on them. Over time, moreover, commitments from China became more difficult to secure.

Meanwhile, at the WTO, the United States brought 27 cases against China, often in collaboration with like-minded WTO members. We secured victories in every case that was decided. Still, even when China changed the specific practices that we had challenged, it did not typically change the underlying policies, and meaningful reforms by China remained elusive.

In 2017, the previous Administration launched an investigation into China's acts, policies and practices relating to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974. The findings made in this investigation led to substantial U.S. tariffs on imports from China as well as corresponding retaliation by China. Against this backdrop of rising tensions, in January 2020, the two sides signed what is commonly referred to as the "Phase One Agreement." This Agreement included commitments from China to improve market access for the agriculture and financial services sectors, along with commitments relating to intellectual property and technology transfer and a commitment by China to increase its purchases of U.S. goods and services.

Many of the commitments in the Phase One Agreement reflected changes that China had already been planning or pursuing for its own benefit or that otherwise served China's interests, such as the changes involving intellectual property protection and the opening up of more financial services sectors. Other commitments to which China agreed reflected a calculation, as it saw them as appeasing U.S. priorities of the prior Administration, as evidenced by the attention paid to the agriculture sector in the Phase One Agreement and the novel commitments relating to China's purchases of U.S. goods and services ostensibly as a means to reduce the bilateral trade deficit.

Given these dynamics, and given China's interest in a more stable relationship with the United States, China followed through in implementing some provisions of the Phase One Agreement. At the same time, China has not yet implemented some of the more significant commitments that it made in the Phase One Agreement, such as commitments in the area of agricultural biotechnology and the required risk assessment that China is to conduct relating to the use of ractopamine in cattle and swine. China has also fallen far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in 2020 and 2021.

The reality is that this Agreement did not meaningfully address the more fundamental concerns that the United States has with China's state-led, non-market policies and practices and their harmful impact on the U.S. economy and U.S. workers and businesses. China's government continues to employ a wide array of interventionist industrial policies and supporting measures, which provide substantial government guidance, massive financial resources and favorable regulatory support to Chinese industries across the economy, often in pursuit of specific targets for capacity and production levels and market shares. In furtherance of its industrial policy objectives, China has also limited market access for imported goods and services and restricted the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China. It has also used various, often illicit, means to secure foreign intellectual property and technology to further its industrial policy objectives.

The principal beneficiaries of these non-market policies and practices are China's state-owned and state-invested enterprises and numerous nominally private domestic companies that are attempting to move up the economic value chain in industries across the economy. The benefits that Chinese industries receive largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their workers and businesses. As a result, markets all over the world are less efficient than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign businesses that seek to compete against Chinese enterprises, whether in China, in the United States or globally.

The industrial policies that flow from China's non-market economic system have systematically distorted critical sectors of the global economy such as steel, aluminum, solar and fisheries, devastating markets in the United States and other countries. At the same time, as is their design, China's industrial policies are increasingly responsible for displacing companies in new, emerging sectors of the global economy, as the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party powerfully intervene in these sectors on behalf of Chinese companies. Companies in economies disciplined by the market cannot effectively compete with both Chinese companies and the Chinese state.

PART THREE

In Part Three, we explain that, in recent years, it became evident to the United States – and to an increasing number of U.S. trading partners − that new strategies were needed to deal with the many problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, including solutions independent of the WTO. We also emphasize that these strategies needed to be based on a realistic assessment of China's economic and trade regime and need to be calibrated not only for the near-term but also for the longer term.

Accordingly, as explained below, the United States is now pursuing a multi-faceted strategic approach that accounts for the current realities in the U.S.-China trade relationship and the many challenges that China poses for the United States and other trading partners, both now and likely in the future.

The U.S. Trade Representative announced the initial steps of the United States' strategic approach in October 2021. This approach includes several components, which we have begun to implement.

First, the United States is continuing to pursue bilateral engagement with China and is seeking to find areas where some progress can be achieved. China is an important trading partner, and every avenue for obtaining real change in its economic and trade regime must be utilized. Currently, we are engaging China on the United States' most fundamental concerns with China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, which includes China's industrial policies. At the same time, the United States is working to hold China accountable for its existing commitments, including under the Phase One Agreement. If China fully implements the Phase One Agreement, it will help establish a more solid foundation for bilateral engagement on more significant outstanding issues.

Second, it is clear that domestic trade tools – including updated or new domestic trade tools reflecting today's realities – will be necessary to secure a more level playing field for U.S. workers and businesses. The United States therefore is exploring how best to use and improve domestic trade tools to achieve that end.

Finally, it is equally critical for the United States to work more intensely and broadly with allies and like-minded partners in order to build support for solutions to the many significant problems that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has created for the global trading system. This work is taking place in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora, including the WTO.

PART FOUR

Part Four discusses specific problematic Chinese policies and practices in more detail. These policies and practices are grouped into sections on non-tariff measures, intellectual property rights, agriculture, services and transparency.

PART ONE: ASSESSMENT OF CHINA'S WTO MEMBERSHIP

CHINA'S WTO ACCESSION

In July of 1986, China applied for admission to the WTO's predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The GATT formed a Working Party in March of 1987, composed of all interested GATT contracting parties, to examine China's application and negotiate terms for China's accession. For the next eight years, negotiations were conducted under the auspices of the GATT Working Party. Following the formation of the WTO on January 1, 1995, pursuant to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), a successor WTO Working Party, composed of all interested WTO members, took over the negotiations.

Like all WTO accession negotiations, the negotiations with China had three basic aspects. First, China provided information to the Working Party regarding its trade regime. China also updated this information periodically during the 15 years of negotiations to reflect changes in its trade regime. Second, each interested WTO member negotiated bilaterally with China regarding market access concessions and commitments in the goods and services areas, including, for example, the tariffs that would apply on industrial and agricultural goods and the commitments that China would make to open up its market to foreign services suppliers. The most trade liberalizing of the concessions and commitments obtained through these bilateral negotiations were consolidated into China's Goods and Services Schedules and apply to all WTO members. Third, overlapping in time with these bilateral negotiations, China engaged in multilateral negotiations with Working Party members on the rules that would govern trade with China. Throughout these multilateral negotiations, U.S. leadership in working with China was critical to removing obstacles to China's WTO accession and achieving a consensus on appropriate rules commitments. These commitments are set forth in China's Protocol of Accession and an accompanying Report of the Working Party.

WTO members formally approved an agreement on the terms of accession for China on November 10, 2001, at the WTO's Fourth Ministerial Conference, held in Doha, Qatar. One day later, China signed the agreement and deposited its instrument of ratification with the Director-General of the WTO. China became the 143rd member of the WTO on December 11, 2001.

China's Protocol of Accession, accompanying Working Party Report and Goods and Services Schedules are available on the WTO's website (www.wto.org).

To accede to the WTO, China agreed to take concrete steps to remove trade barriers and open its markets to foreign companies and their exports from the first day of accession in virtually every product sector and for a wide range of services. Supporting these steps, China also agreed to undertake important changes to its legal framework, designed to add transparency and predictability to business dealings.

Like all acceding WTO members, China also agreed to assume the obligations of more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements. Areas of principal concern to the United States and China's other trading partners, as evidenced by the accession negotiations, included core principles of the WTO, such as most-favored nation treatment, national treatment, transparency and the availability of independent review of administrative decisions. Other key concerns arose in the areas of agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, trade-related investment measures, customs valuation, rules of origin, import licensing, antidumping, subsidies and countervailing measures, trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights and services. For some of its obligations, China was allowed minimal transition periods, where it was considered necessary.

Through its membership in the WTO, China also became subject to the same expectations as other WTO members, as set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, among other things, WTO members expressly affirmed their view that the WTO member economies would participate in the international trading system based on "open, market-oriented policies."

Even though the terms of China's accession agreement are directed at the opening of China's market to WTO members, China's accession agreement also includes provisions designed to address issues related to any injury that U.S. or other WTO members' industries and workers might experience based on import surges or unfair trade practices, particularly during what was envisioned to be a time of transition for China from a non-market economy to a market economy. These mechanisms include: (1) a special textile safeguard mechanism (which expired on December 11, 2008, seven years after China's WTO accession); (2) a unique, China-specific safeguard mechanism allowing a WTO member to take action against increasing Chinese imports that disrupt its market (which expired on December 11, 2013, 12 years after China's WTO accession); (3) an expression of the ability of WTO members to use an antidumping methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market economy conditions prevail in the industry producing the like product with regard to the manufacture, production and sale of that product; and (4) an expression of the ability to use methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits to Chinese enterprises that are not based on terms and conditions prevailing in China.

With China's consent, the WTO also created a special multilateral mechanism for reviewing China's compliance on an annual basis. Known as the Transitional Review Mechanism, this mechanism operated annually for eight years after China's accession. A final review, looking back over the first 10 years of China's WTO membership, took place in 2011.

EXPECTATIONS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP

For all WTO members, the expectations of WTO membership are clearly set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, WTO members expressly affirmed their view that the establishment of the WTO ushers in a "new era of global economic cooperation" that "reflect[s] the widespread desire to operate in a fairer and more open multilateral trading system." WTO members further made clear their determination that their economies would participate in the international trading system, based on both "open, market-oriented policies" and "the commitments set out in the Uruguay Round Agreements and Decisions."

As this language makes clear, it clearly was not contemplated that any WTO member would reject market-based policies in favor of a state-led trade regime. It also was not contemplated that any WTO member would pursue mercantilist outcomes instead of policies promoting a fairer and more open multilateral trading system. Rather, it was expected that each WTO member would pursue open, market-oriented policies designed to achieve more efficient outcomes. The pursuit of open, market-oriented policies means not only strictly adhering to the agreed rules but also observing in good faith the fundamental principles that run throughout the many WTO agreements, which include non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency.

When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and embed it in its trading system and institutions. Through China's commitments and representations, WTO members understood that China intended to dismantle existing state-led, mercantilist policies and practices, and they expected China to continue on its then-existing path of economic reform and successfully complete a transformation to a market-oriented economy and trade regime.

China's protocol of accession to the WTO sets out China's obligations under the WTO agreements as well as numerous additional China-specific commitments made necessary because of the need for China to transform its approach to the economy and trade. China itself acknowledged "the evolving nature of its economy," and it confirmed that "a socialist market economy system was applied" in China. Similarly, WTO members highlighted that "China was continuing the process of transition towards a full market economy." WTO members noted, for example, that "the special features of China's economy, in its present state of reform, still created the potential for a certain level of trade-distorting subsidization."

For these reasons, it was agreed that special safeguard-like provisions would be included among the terms of China's protocol of accession as protective measures while China completed its transformation into a market economy. For example, China's protocol of accession included a China-specific safeguard mechanism, special antidumping rules and special methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits. It also created a unique, 10-year review mechanism designed to monitor China's progress in implementing its many WTO commitments and to secure updated information on the use of industrial plans by China.

CHINA'S WTO RECORD

As has been catalogued in prior reports, China has a poor record when it comes to complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based − non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. Too often, China flouts the rules to achieve industrial policy objectives. In addition, and of more serious concern to the United States and other WTO members, China has not made sufficient progress in transitioning toward a market economy. China continues to embrace a state-led, non-market and mercantilist approach to the economy and trade. This approach results in sophisticated and expansive policies and practices that often evade WTO disciplines and cause serious harm to markets, industries and workers in the United States and other WTO members. At the same time, China has used the benefits of WTO membership – including its guarantee of open, non-discriminatory access to the markets of other WTO members – to become the WTO's largest trader, while resisting calls for further liberalization of its trade regime by claiming to be a "developing" country.

Adoption of Market-Oriented Policies

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of transitioning to a market economy has not changed. Two decades after its accession to the WTO, China has still not embraced open, market-oriented policies. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve industrial policy objectives. Indeed, the state's role continues to grow, not recede.

As we detailed in prior reports, China pursues a wide array of continually evolving interventionist policies and practices. It offers substantial government guidance, resources and regulatory support to Chinese industries. At the same time, it also seeks to limit market access for imported goods and services and restrict the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China in various ways. The principal beneficiaries of China's policies and practices are China's state-owned enterprises and numerous other significant domestic companies, sometimes referred to as "national champions," that are attempting to move up the economic value chain.

The benefits that Chinese industries realize largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their companies and workers. As a result of China's non-market policies and practices, markets all over the world are less efficient than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

This situation has worsened in recent years. Since new leaders assumed power in China in 2013, the state's role in the economy – effectuated by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the Chinese Communist Party – has grown. While China has repeatedly signaled in recent years that it is pursuing "economic reform," China's concept of "economic reform" differs from the type of change that a country would be pursuing if it were embracing open, market-oriented principles. For China, "economic reform" appears to mean perfecting the management of the economy by the government and the Party and strengthening the state sector, particularly state-owned enterprises. Meanwhile, as the state's role in the economy has increased in recent years, the depth and breadth of concerns facing U.S. and other foreign companies doing business in China – or competing with favored Chinese companies in markets outside of China – have similarly increased.

To fully appreciate the challenges presented by China's non-market economy, it is vital to understand the extent to which the state still maintains control over economic decision-making in China. As we catalogued in prior reports, a thorough examination of China's Constitution, relevant directives and pronouncements by China's leadership, legislative and regulatory measures issued by the Chinese government, China's industrial plans and the actions of the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party leaves no doubt that the state maintains a tight grip on virtually all economic activity. Indeed, the government and the Party have constitutional mandates to develop a "socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics." To fulfill these mandates, the framework of China's economy is set by the government and the Party, which exercise control directly and indirectly over the allocation of resources through instruments such as government ownership and control of key economic actors and innumerable government directives. The government and the Party also direct and channel economic actors to meet the state's planning targets. The government and the Party permit market forces to operate only to the extent that they accord with the objectives of national economic and industrial policies. When there is conflict between market outcomes and state objectives, the government and the Party intervene to ensure that the state's objectives prevail.

Aside from the role of the government and the Party in managing the economy, there are also serious concerns over how the government and the Party exercise influence over the operations and investment decisions of both state-owned enterprises and private companies, including foreign-invested enterprises. This influence appears to be growing, as the Party is increasing its control over key actors in China's economy and not, as had been hoped, enabling China's transition to a market economy.

China claims that its state-owned enterprises make business decisions independently of the state and based on market principles. However, the government and the Party continue to exercise control over state-owned enterprises. Among other things, they appoint and control key executives through the Chinese Communist Party Organization Department. They also provide state-owned enterprises with preferential access to important inputs (such as land and capital) and other competitive advantages unavailable to private Chinese companies. State-owned enterprises, in turn, play an outsized role in China's economy. For example, state-owned enterprises outstrip private Chinese companies in terms of their share of total credit, their market dominance in key industries and their share of total market capitalization on China's stock market.

Both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies also host internal Party committees capable of exercising government and Party influence over their corporate governance and business decisions. This arrangement is codified in Chinese law under Article 19 of the Company Law, which applies to both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies. In recent years, moreover, the Party has taken steps to increase the strength and presence of Party committees within all of these companies. For example, state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies are being pressured to amend their articles of association to ensure Party representation on their boards of directors, usually as the Chairman of the Board, and to ensure that important company decisions are made in consultation with Party cells.

Increasingly in recent years, China has also taken "golden shares" in large private Chinese companies. Under this type of arrangement, the Chinese government via a government guidance fund or other state-backed entity purchases a small stake in the company in exchange for a seat on the board of directors or veto rights. The result is stronger Chinese government oversight and control of the company's operations.

As we explained in prior reports, U.S. industry associations report that the Party is also taking steps to influence the managerial and investment decisions of foreign-invested enterprises in China through the insertion of Party cells. According to these reports, these efforts in some cases are beginning to affect the decision-making processes of some Chinese-foreign joint ventures in China.

Further reinforcing the Party's influence over enterprises in China is the Social Credit System, a tool endorsed by the Party that the government will increasingly be using to monitor, rate and condition not only the conduct of all individuals in China, but also all domestic and foreign companies in China. This system has become operational, but so far there is no fully integrated national system for assigning comprehensive social credit scores for companies, and the social credit system remains highly fragmented, as local governments experiment with their own pilot social credit schemes. In any event, it appears that the government will use the Social Credit System, among other things, to ensure that economic actors operate in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives and do not cross political redlines on sensitive matters like human rights.

Separate from these various mechanisms used to control company behavior, the government and the Party continue to control or otherwise influence the prices of key factors of production. The result is that the means of production in China are not allocated or priced according to market principles. For example, all land in China is property of the state, as either state-owned urban land or collectively owned rural land. The state also exerts a high degree of control over energy and other input prices. In addition, there are significant institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management. China denies workers the right of association and the right to organize and collectively bargain. China prohibits the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, and workers do not have the legal right to strike, which is an important lever in collective action and negotiation with management over wages in market economies. In addition, government restrictions on labor mobility continue to inhibit and guide labor flows, causing distortions on the supply side of the labor market.

The government and the Party also exercise strong control over the financial sector. Five large commercial banks that are majority state-owned entities operate large branch networks on a nationwide basis and account for nearly half of total commercial bank assets. There are also three large state-owned policy banks, as well as scores of city commercial banks and credit unions under local government control. In addition to the ownership of these banks by the government, the state exercises other forms of influence over banking decisions. The Party, through its Organization Department, appoints executives in state-owned banks and other state-owned financial institutions. China's central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), also meets frequently with large banks in China to ensure that their lending decisions align with PBOC and government objectives. In addition, the Law on Commercial Banks provides that "commercial banks are to conduct their business of lending in accordance with the needs of national economic and social development and under the guidance of the industrial policies of the state."

Similarly, China's legal system continues to function as an instrument by which the government and the Party can secure discrete economic outcomes, channel broader economic policy and pursue industrial policy objectives. Key legal institutions, such as the courts, are structured to respond to the Party's direction, both broadly and on a case-specific basis. As a general matter, to the extent that companies and individuals seek to act independently of government or Party direction, the legal system does not provide a venue for them to achieve these objectives on a systemic or consistent basis. In addition, companies and individuals continue to face challenges in obtaining impartial outcomes, either because of local protectionism or corruption.

The larger issue of China's restrictions on the freedom of information also impacts China's economic system. For example, while China's Internet firewall and the Party's regular censorship of audio-visual and print media have many negative effects outside China's economic system, they also create distortions in China's economy, and these distortions affect the ability of foreign companies to operate and compete effectively in China's market.

In March 2021, China finalized and issued the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) for National Economic and Social Development, which runs from 2021 through 2025. Like its predecessor, the 14th Five-year Plan covers all sectors of China's economy and is not limited to one overarching plan, but instead will include hundreds of sub-plans. In this regard, various institutions participate in plan formulation and execution, including central government bodies with legislative and regulatory authority, thousands of provincial and local government authorities, various organs of the Party and key Chinese companies.

When compared to the industrial plans of other WTO members, China's industrial plans are fundamentally different. In several significant ways, China's industrial plans go well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries. First, adherence to the objectives of China's industrial plans is effectively mandatory. Chinese companies have little discretion to ignore them, even when market forces would dictate different commercial behavior. Second, the financial support that the state provides to domestic industries in support of China's industrial plans is significantly larger than in other countries, and it is not limited to funding for research and development (R&D). The state also provides massive, market-distorting financial support to the ongoing operations of China's domestic industries. This support often leads to severe excess capacity in China – followed by China's widespread dumping of the inevitable excess production into the markets of other WTO members. This assault on global markets can cause serious harm to other WTO members' industries and workers. The WTO does not provide effective mechanisms for addressing this problem. Third, China actively seeks to help its domestic producers through myriad additional policies and practices that impede, disadvantage and harm the foreign competition and skew the playing field against imported goods and services and foreign manufacturers and services suppliers.

When combined with China's large size and large share of global trade, the policies and practices that China pursues in support of its industrial plans transform China into a unique and pressing problem for the United States and other market economies as well as for the WTO and the multilateral trading system. Moreover, this troubling situation is not static. New mechanisms to maintain and enhance the state's control over the economy in China continue to emerge.

Compliance with WTO Rules

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based has not changed. China's record remains poor.

As we detailed in prior reports, China's economic and trade regime has generated many WTO compliance concerns over the years. Too often, WTO members have had to resort to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to change problematic Chinese policies and practices. The United States, for example, has brought 27 cases against China at the WTO covering a wide range of important policies and practices, such as: (1) local content requirements in the automobile sector; (2) discriminatory taxes in the integrated circuit sector; (3) hundreds of prohibited subsidies in a wide range of manufacturing sectors; (4) inadequate intellectual property rights enforcement in the copyright area; (5) significant market access barriers in copyright-intensive industries; (6) severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of financial information services; (7) export restraints on numerous raw materials; (8) a denial of market access for foreign suppliers of electronic payment services; (9) repeated abusive use of trade remedies; (10) excessive domestic support for key agricultural commodities; (11) the opaque and protectionist administration of tariff-rate quotas for key agricultural commodities; and (12) discriminatory regulations on technology licensing. Even though the United States has routinely prevailed in these WTO disputes, as have other WTO members in their disputes against China, they take years to litigate, consume significant resources and often require further efforts when China fails to comply with WTO rules.

As explained in prior reports, China has been a particularly bad actor when it comes to trade remedies. While the use of trade remedies in a manner consistent with WTO rules is an important tool for protecting domestic industries from unfair and injurious trade practices, China has made a practice of launching antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) investigations that appear designed to discourage its trading partners from the legitimate exercise of their rights under WTO rules. This type of retaliatory conduct is not typical of WTO members, nor is it a legitimate basis for seeking AD and CVD relief. Moreover, when China has pursued AD and CVD investigations under these circumstances, it appears that its regulatory authorities have tended to move forward with the imposition of duties regardless of the strength of the underlying legal claims and evidence. The United States' three successful WTO cases challenging the duties imposed by China on imports of U.S. grain-oriented electrical steel, U.S. chicken broiler products and U.S. automobiles offer telling examples of this problem. Indeed, China's poor behavior does not always stop after an adverse WTO ruling. In two of the three WTO cases brought by the United States on trade remedies, China did not implement the WTO's recommendations, and the United States was forced to bring Article 21.5 compliance proceedings to secure China's compliance.

In addition, China has often taken steps to obscure its actions to make it more difficult for trading partners to even challenge them in the WTO's adjudicative system. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism was designed to facilitate the resolution of disagreements over whether an action breaches a WTO obligation, but where the action is so obscured that it is difficult to demonstrate it as a factual matter, the dispute settlement mechanism can fail to be an effective disciplinary tool. In this regard, as USTR has explained in prior reports, China disregards many of its WTO transparency obligations, which places its trading partners at a disadvantage and often serves as a cloak for China to conceal unfair, non-market and distortive trade policies and practices from scrutiny. For example, for the first 15 years of its WTO membership, China failed to notify any sub-central government subsidies to the WTO, despite the fact that most subsidies in China are provided by provincial and local governments. The magnitude and significance of this problem is illustrated by the five WTO cases that the United States has brought challenging prohibited subsidies maintained by China. While those cases involved hundreds of subsidies, most of the subsidies were provided by sub-central governments. The United States was able to bring those cases only because of its own extensive investigatory efforts to uncover China's opaque subsidization practices. Most other WTO members lack the resources to conduct the same types of investigations. Today, China continues to shield massive sub-central government subsidies from the scrutiny of other WTO members. Together with other non-market practices, these subsidies contribute to the serious excess capacity problems that plague industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fishing and devastate global markets and foreign competitors.

As has become clear, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is not effective in addressing the serious issues that arise from a WTO member's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade that systematically disadvantages that member's trading partners and broadly conflicts with the fundamental, market-oriented underpinnings of the WTO system. The value of the dispute settlement mechanism is also undermined where a WTO Member does not operate in good faith. As a result, over time, despite the enforcement efforts of the United States and other WTO members, China has been able to reinforce its state-led, non-market policies and practices, which WTO rules and the dispute settlement mechanism have so far proven unable to discipline effectively.

PART TWO: PAST STRATEGIES

China's Initial Years of WTO Membership

As explained above, when China joined the WTO two decades ago, many of China's trading partners expected that over time China would adhere to global trade rules and other international norms and fully embrace open, market-oriented policies. The United States was certainly one of them. In anticipation of the fundamental changes that China would be making following its accession to the WTO, many foreign businesses began to flock to China, eager to take advantage of China's low labor costs or to position themselves to supply their goods and services to China's growing middle class. China itself encouraged this foreign investment, seeing foreign companies as useful tools to help develop and grow its economy.

For the first five years of China's WTO membership, the terms of China's accession agreement allowed China to phase in compliance with many of its obligations. During this initial five-year period, the United States and other WTO members essentially granted China a grace period because they were reluctant to challenge China when it acted contrary to an obligation under a WTO agreement or failed to timely implement a China-specific commitment.

Once this initial five-year period of China's WTO membership concluded, the United States decided that it was time to hold China fully accountable as a responsible member of the international trading system. With its decision in 2006 to begin holding China accountable at the WTO, the United States began to pursue a dual-track approach to China, using high-level bilateral dialogues in an attempt to resolve concerns relating to problematic policies and practices emanating from China's continued embrace of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, while also pursuing enforcement of China's WTO obligations through dispute settlement and other efforts where bilateral dialogue did not resolve U.S. concerns.

Bilateral Dialogues

For nearly 15 years, the United States held numerous high-level meetings under the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT), the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED), the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED) and the U.S.-China Comprehensive Economic Dialogue (CED). These dialogues were intended to push China toward complying with and internalizing WTO rules and norms and making other market-oriented changes. While the United States approached these dialogues in good faith and put great effort into them, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States secured commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but China repeatedly failed to follow through on those commitments. In more recent years, it became more difficult for the United States to secure commitments from China, while China's follow-through remained inconsistent and impossible to enforce.

For example, at the 2010 S&ED meeting, the 2012 S&ED meeting, the 2012 summit meeting between President Obama and President Xi and the 2014 JCCT meeting, China committed that foreign companies are free to base technology transfer decisions on business and market considerations and to independently negotiate and decide whether and under what circumstances to assign or license intellectual property rights to affiliated or unaffiliated enterprises. But China did not follow through on these commitments. China's regulatory authorities did not begin allowing U.S. companies to make their own decisions about technology transfer and the assignment or licensing of intellectual property rights. Instead, they continued to require or pressure foreign companies to transfer technology as a condition for securing investment or other approvals. Years later, these same practices became a focus of USTR's Section 301 investigation of China's acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation.

WTO Enforcement

Over time, the United States became the most frequent – and most successful − user of the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to challenge Chinese policies and practices. As discussed above, the United States has brought 27 WTO disputes against China and has prevailed in every dispute that has been adjudicated. However, even when China changed the specific practices that we had challenged, it typically did not change the underlying policies and meaningful reforms by China remained elusive.

As has become clear, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is of only limited value in addressing a situation where a WTO member is dedicated to a state-led economic and trade regime that prevails over market forces. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is designed to address good faith disputes in which one member believes that another member has adopted a measure or taken an action that breaches a WTO obligation. This mechanism is not designed to address a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system. No amount of WTO dispute settlement by other WTO members would be sufficient to remedy this systemic problem. Indeed, many of the most harmful policies and practices being pursued by China are not even directly disciplined by WTO rules.

Other WTO Efforts

In addition to pursuing WTO dispute settlement cases, the United States actively participated in meetings at the WTO addressing China's adherence to its WTO obligations. For example, the United States took on a leading role in the numerous China-specific Transitional Review Mechanism meetings from 2002 through 2011. However, China consistently approached these meetings in ways that frustrated WTO members' efforts to secure a meaningful assessment of China's compliance efforts. The United States also raised, and continues to raise, China-related issues at regular meetings of WTO committees and councils, including the WTO's General Council. The United States sought to highlight how China's trade-disruptive economic model works, the costs that it exacts from other WTO members and the benefits that China receives from it. While these efforts have raised awareness among WTO members, they have not led to meaningful changes in China's approach to trade.

In theory, the WTO membership could have adopted new rules expressly requiring members like China to abandon non-market economic systems and state-led, mercantilist trade regimes. For two basic reasons, however, members have not pursued any negotiation of new WTO rules that would change China's current approach to the economy and trade in a meaningful way.

First, new WTO rules disciplining China would require agreement among all WTO members, including China. China has shown no willingness at the WTO to consider fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime. Given the extent to which China has benefited and continues to benefit from the current state of affairs, it was not realistic to expect that China would agree to effective new WTO disciplines on its behavior. Indeed, China has been using its WTO membership to develop rapidly. In 2001, when China acceded to the WTO, China's economy was the sixth largest in the world. China's economy is now four times larger than it was in 2001, and it is the second largest economy in the world. China also has risen to become the largest goods trader among WTO members. It is therefore highly unlikely that China would agree to new WTO disciplines targeted at its policies and practices. In fact, in connection with ongoing discussions at the WTO relating to needed WTO reform, China has stated that it would not alter its non-market economic system.

Second, China has a long record of not pursuing ambitious outcomes at the WTO. Past agreements, even relatively narrow ones, have been difficult to achieve, and even when an agreement is achieved, it is significantly less ambitious because of China's participation.

As these experiences make clear, it is unrealistic to believe that actions at the WTO alone will be sufficient to force or persuade China to make fundamental changes to its economic and trade regime. The WTO system was designed for countries that are truly committed to market principles, not for an economically powerful country determined to maintain a state-led, non-market system, and China has demonstrated no willingness to change its approach in any meaningful way.

Domestic Trade Tools

In August 2017, USTR launched an investigation under the authority of Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation. USTR invited written comments and information from interested parties and scheduled a public hearing, which was held in October 2017. In March 2018, after a thorough review and analysis of the evidence, USTR issued a detailed report, finding that China had engaged in a range of unfair and harmful conduct.

First, USTR found that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. firms.

Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients.

Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans.

Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information, such as technical data, negotiating positions and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. The purpose of these actions is to support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization and economic development.

Based on these findings, the United States took a range of responsive actions, beginning in March 2018 with the initiation of a WTO dispute settlement case challenging Chinese measures that deny foreign patent holders the ability to enforce their patent rights against a Chinese joint venture partner after a technology transfer contract ends and that impose mandatory adverse contract terms that discriminate against and are less favorable for imported foreign technology as compared to Chinese technology. Consultations took place in August 2018, and a panel was established to hear the case at the United States' request in November 2018. In March 2019, China announced the withdrawal of certain measures that the United States had challenged in its panel request. After China's announcement, the WTO panel suspended its work in light of ongoing consultations between the United States and China to resolve their dispute.

As a further response to the Section 301 findings, the Secretary of the Treasury began examining possible means for better addressing concerns about investment in the United States directed or facilitated by China in industries or technologies deemed important to the United States. Not long thereafter, however, the U.S. Congress passed the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 (FIRRMA), which was designed to strengthen and modernize the existing mechanism for reviewing foreign investment in the United States for national security purposes through the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, also known as CFIUS. Among other things, FIRRMA expanded CFIUS's authority to review transactions involving foreign investment into U.S. businesses with critical technologies. At the same time that it passed FIRRMA, Congress passed the Export Control Reform Act, which, among other things, created a process for identifying emerging and foundational technologies that should be added to existing U.S. export controls.

Finally, shortly after issuing its Section 301 report in March 2018, USTR commenced Section 301 procedures for imposing additional tariffs on imports of Chinese goods. Subsequently, the United States imposed an additional duty of 25 percent on approximately $50 billion worth of Chinese imports containing industrially significant technologies, including those related to Made in China 2025, a Chinese industrial plan that seeks to create dominant Chinese companies in 10 strategic sectors, including by replacing foreign technologies, products and services with Chinese technologies, products and services over time. These additional tariffs were imposed in two tranches, with $34 billion becoming effective in July 2018 and a further $16 billion becoming effective in August 2018. Over time, faced with retaliatory tariffs imposed by China and a lack of progress in high-level bilateral discussions in which the United States proposed specific structural changes for China to become more open and market-oriented, the United States imposed further additional tariffs in two more tranches. By September 2019, the United States had imposed additional tariffs of 25 percent on $250 billion of Chinese imports and additional tariffs of 15 percent on a further $120 billion of Chinese imports. China had also imposed further retaliatory tariffs on imports of U.S. goods.

In December 2019, after one year of negotiations, the United States announced that the two sides had finalized the text of an economic and trade agreement, which was later signed in January 2020. This agreement, commonly referred to as the "Phase One Agreement," included commitments from China on intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, currency and foreign exchange, and the purchase of U.S. goods and services. The commitments varied in ambition, and in effectiveness. For example, some commitments related to financial services reflected reforms that China was already contemplating or pursuing, as China had begun easing foreign investment restrictions in some financial services sectors in 2017. In addition, in the area of intellectual property rights, while China committed to make a number of changes to its laws and regulations, China saw many of these changes as now needed by its domestic businesses, given their own increasing efforts at innovation. It also remains unclear how faithfully and fairly China will actually enforce the changes to its laws and regulations. Meanwhile, other commitments that China made, such as in the area of technology transfer, are difficult to verify given the tactics that China takes to obscure its activities.

Notably, the Phase One Agreement did not address many of the U.S. concerns that the United States had been seeking to address in its negotiations with China. The unresolved issues included critical issues in areas such as industrial plans, subsidies, state-owned enterprises, excess capacity, state-sponsored cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property, standards, cybersecurity, data localization requirements, restrictions on cross-border data transfers, competition law enforcement and regulatory transparency as well as certain issues in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer and services market access that were not addressed in the Phase One Agreement.

In light of the limited progress represented by the Phase One Agreement, the United States did not make major changes to the Section 301 tariffs. The United States decided to suspend indefinitely 15 percent tariffs scheduled to be imposed on an additional $160 billion of Chinese imports on December 15, 2019, and not to move forward with plans to raise the tariff rate on $250 billion of Chinese goods from 25 percent to 30 percent. In addition, the United States decided to reduce from 15 percent to 7.5 percent the tariffs that it had previously imposed on $120 billion of Chinese goods. Otherwise, the United States kept in place tariffs on $370 billion of Chinese imports, which included 25 percent tariffs on $250 billion of Chinese imports and 7.5 percent tariffs on $120 billion of Chinese imports.

Since the Phase One Agreement entered into force in February 2020, the United States has been closely monitoring China's progress in implementing its commitments. The United States has also been fully utilizing the consultation arrangements set forth in the agreement for ensuring that China adheres to its obligations, including regular meetings required by the agreement between the two sides at the working level, the Deputy level and the Principal level. The two sides have also held numerous technical-level meetings. Through these many engagements, the United States has raised various concerns that have arisen regarding China's implementation progress. In addition, official trade data appears to show that China fell far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in calendar year 2020 and that China is similarly not on track to implement its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in calendar year 2021. Serious concerns with China's implementation efforts have also arisen in the area of agriculture, particularly with regard to China's commitments relating to agricultural biotechnology and the required risk assessment that China is to conduct relating to the use of ractopamine in cattle and swine.

Fundamental Problems Persist

Despite the United States' extensive efforts, both bilaterally and at the WTO and through the use of domestic tools like Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, a long list of problems with China's economic and trade regime persist. Because China is the largest trader among WTO members, the harm caused by these problems is significantly magnified.

Most importantly, fundamental structural issues remain unaddressed. These include, for example, China's heavy reliance on market-distorting industrial policies covering virtually every sector of the economy, preferential treatment of state enterprises, massive subsidization of domestic industries (including financial support to and through state-owned enterprises and other state entities at multiple levels of government and a banking system dominated by state-owned banks favoring state-owned enterprises and targeted industries), forced technology transfer, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property and severe and persistent non-market excess capacity in key industries.

A host of other serious issues also remain outstanding. Key examples include market access restrictions, unjustified non-tariff barriers, import substitution, unfair labor practices (including forced labor), lax or unenforced environmental standards, increased adoption of unique Chinese national standards (including reportedly through the China Standards 2035 plan, which seeks to set the global standards for next-generation technologies), continued gaps in intellectual property protection and enforcement, overly broad and protectionist cybersecurity regulation, data localization requirements and cross-border data transfer restrictions, the misuse of competition policy for industrial policy objectives, purposeful obfuscation of trade and economic policies, especially with regard to China's subsidies practices, and inadequate regulatory transparency.

Overlaying all of these problematic policies and practices is China's economic system. Unlike the U.S. system, China's economic system is state-led, and it facilitates control and direction of all aspects of the economy by the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party, along with a reliance on rule by law rather than rule of law. The very fact that decisions in the marketplace are made based on the goals of the state, rather than based on commercial considerations, distorts the global economy in ways that can weaken and damage trading partners' economies.

One significant result of China's non-market economic system is the creation of excess capacity – that is, capacity that would not have been created and would not persist if market forces were operating properly. Excess capacity is a sign that resources are not being allocated in an efficient manner.

In the past, China itself has acknowledged excess capacity in several industries, including steel, cement, electrolytic aluminum, flat glass and shipbuilding. Numerous other excess capacity industries have been identified by industry associations in the United States and other countries. Some of the Chinese industries most likely to inflict the disastrous consequences of severe excess capacity on the world in the future can be found in the Made in China 2025 industrial plan. Through that plan, the Chinese government is seeking to create dominant Chinese companies in 10 sectors, including advanced information technology, robotics and automated machine tools, aircraft and aircraft components, maritime vessels and marine engineering equipment, advanced rail equipment, new energy vehicles, electrical generation and transmission equipment, agricultural machinery, new materials and pharmaceuticals and medical devices. By some estimates, the Chinese government is making available more than $500 billion of financial support to these sectors, often using large government guidance funds that China attempts to shield from scrutiny by claiming that they are wholly private. Based on the recent history of the steel and aluminum industries, China's non-market distortions in these newer sectors will likely result in oversupply, leading to loss of jobs and production in market economies.

Another example of the harm that can be caused by China's non-market economic system involves forced technology transfer. In USTR's Section 301 investigation, USTR issued two extensive factual reports that detailed how the Chinese government uses foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal joint venture requirements, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. The reports also explained how China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. In addition, the reports analyzed how the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese entities to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by state industrial plans. Finally, the reports illustrated how the Chinese government has conducted or supported cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, with the targets being intellectual property and sensitive commercial information held by U.S. firms. While these reports focused on the harm caused to U.S. interests, it is not a problem borne solely by the United States. As in the case of excess capacity, China's unfair policies and practices relating to forced technology transfer also affect other WTO members whose companies have developed or are developing advanced technologies.

In addition to severe and persistent excess capacity and forced technology transfer, China's non-market economic system causes other serious harm to industries and workers in the United States and other WTO members. This harm occurs because Chinese companies use the artificial competitive advantages provided to them by the interventionist policies and practices of the Chinese state to undersell their foreign competition around the world. The extent of this harm to foreign manufacturers is reflected in the very large number of antidumping and countervailing duty investigations that have been initiated against China by the investigating authorities of WTO members. Since China joined the WTO in 2001, it has been the number one target for both antidumping and countervailing duty investigations.

PART THREE: NEW STRATEGIES

Current Realities

As a starting point, any new U.S. trade policy toward China must account for current realities in the U.S.-China trade relationship and the many challenges that China poses for the United States and other trading partners, both now and in the future. Given that China's approach to the economy and trade has evolved and become more sophisticated, our strategies also need to evolve and become more sophisticated. We also need to find ways to address ― and to protect ourselves against ― China's many harmful, non-market practices. Those practices directly harm American workers, farmers and businesses and threaten our technological edge, weaken the resiliency of our supply chains and undermine our national interest.

For many years, the core objective of U.S. trade policy toward China was to make China a more responsible stakeholder at the WTO. Currently, however, it has become widely accepted in the United States that China's approach to the economy and trade has not moved toward a stronger embrace of open, market-oriented principles and instead has seen a doubling-down on state capitalism "with Chinese characteristics," which has severely harmed U.S. workers and businesses. It has also become widely accepted in the United States that WTO rules do not, and cannot, effectively discipline many of China's most harmful policies and practices. It is also evident that China has become quite adept at circumventing the existing rules, as well as the attempted enforcement of those rules, by obscuring state involvement in the economy in ways that the WTO rules did not anticipate at the time of their negotiation. As a result, while the WTO still has a significant role to play, enforcement of WTO rules has become less significant and solutions independent of the WTO are considered necessary, including solutions through bilateral engagement and the use of domestic trade tools. It was in large part from that perspective that, in August 2017, the prior Administration launched an investigation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 and then, in March 2018, began the process of imposing tariffs on imports from China and pursued a bilateral negotiation with China that resulted in the Phase One Agreement, which was signed in January 2020.

At the same time, we cannot build a wall between the United States and China and assume that it will address the problems posed by China. That would ignore China's importance to, and integration in, the world economy and would only change the mode of its impact on the United States, but not the ultimate result. We therefore must work to strengthen our economy, our supply chains, our infrastructure, our workers, our farmers and our businesses and to lay a solid foundation for us to continue to innovate and maintain our technological edge.

Changing Global Perspectives

Over the last few years, as changes have taken place in how the United States and U.S. stakeholders view the United States' trade relationship with China, it has become apparent that the views of other countries have also been evolving toward the U.S. view. More and more trading partners appear to accept that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has been severely harming their workers and businesses. While each trading partner is impacted differently by China, there is also a growing consensus that this situation will not change unless new strategies are pursued.

While the WTO remains a strong focus for many of the United States' trading partners, there is a growing awareness that it may be necessary to pursue some solutions outside the WTO in order to avoid the severe harm that will likely continue to result from China's state-led, non-market economic and trade regime. For example, some of the United States' trading partners are now exploring possible new domestic trade tools to address the challenges posed by China's state-led trade regime. These and other like-minded trading partners have also begun working with the United States ― sometimes confidentially ― in pursuit of new joint strategies to address China's harmful non-market policies and practices, including China's increasing use of economic coercion. At the same time, still other trading partners appear to be replicating certain of China's unfair trade practices, or at least accepting them as a result of China's tactics to coerce or entice countries to acquiesce to its practices. Consequently, addressing these practices in China could have the additional benefit of dissuading these countries from following China's example.

Meanwhile, many of China's trading partners are increasingly skeptical of China's rhetoric. For example, China often touts its strong commitment to win-win outcomes in international trade matters, but its actions plainly belie its words. Through state-led industrial plans like Made in China 2025, which targets 10 strategic emerging sectors, China pursues a zero-sum approach. It first seeks to develop and dominate its domestic markets. Once China develops, acquires or steals new technologies and Chinese enterprises become capable of producing the same quality products in those industries as the foreign competition, the state suppresses the foreign competition domestically and then supports Chinese enterprises as they "go out" and seek dominant positions in global markets. Based on the world's past experiences with industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fisheries, a new wave of severe and persistent non-market excess capacity can be expected in industries like those targeted by Made in China 2025, to the detriment of China's trading partners.

It has also not gone unnoticed among China's trading partners ― particularly the democratic market economies ― that China's leadership appears confident in its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade and feels no need to conform to global norms. China's leadership demonstrates confidence in its ability to quiet dissenting voices, as if China's continued rise is inevitable and cannot be held back. Indeed, it has become increasingly evident that China's leadership is seeking to establish new global norms that better reflect and support China's interests, providing an attractive alternative for other authoritarian regimes around the world.

China has also regularly used its economic clout in a coercive way if it perceives that a foreign company or a foreign country has spoken or acted in a way that undermines China's economic and trade interests. This economic coercion can mute international objections to China's non-market policies and practices, even when China flouts the WTO's rules-based international trading system. In recent years, China has increasingly expanded its use of economic coercion to take on foreign governments whose policies or practices are perceived to undermine not only China's economic and trade interests but also China's political interests. China's coercive economic measures have taken a variety of forms, including, for example, import restrictions, export restrictions, restrictions on bilateral investment, regulatory actions, state-led and state-encouraged boycotts, and travel bans.

Many countries have been subjected to this economic coercion. One prominent example currently involves Australia, where China has taken formal and informal measures restricting imports of Australian products like meat, barley, wine, coal, cotton, logs and lobster, apparently because of various legitimate actions taken by the Australian government, such as calling for an independent investigation of the origins of the coronavirus pandemic and enacting a law that prohibits political contributions from foreign sources.

In sum, the reality confronting the United States and other market economies ― especially the democratic market economies ― is not simply that China has a different economic system from ours. China plainly does not hold the same core values that we hold, and its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade conflicts in significant and harmful ways with our market-oriented approaches, to the detriment of our workers and businesses.

U.S. Strategic Approach

The United States expects, and is seeking to ensure, that its trading partners' economic and trade regimes promote fair, market-oriented conditions for competition. Market orientation implies the freedom for enterprises and individuals to pursue their interests and goals on a level playing field. Indeed, in establishing the WTO, members agreed that "open, market-oriented policies" were at the foundation of the multilateral trading system.

In the case of China, nearly two decades after its accession to the WTO, it has still not embraced market-oriented policies. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve national industrial policy objectives. It subsidizes industries that would not otherwise form or thrive, funds acquisitions for the purpose of accessing technologies and directs activities that a private business would not choose to undertake. The evidence is clear, moreover, that when a trading partner with China's size – China is the largest goods trader among WTO members and the second largest economy in the world − pursues non-market policies and practices, the distortions that it creates impose substantial costs on its trading partners. The Chinese state's decisions in the marketplace are not driven by market impacts, but their effects on markets push U.S. and international companies out of sectors, like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fisheries. Once China's dominance is established, barriers to entry can lock-in China's dominance over the long-term. Markets all over the world are less fair and efficient than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against U.S. and other foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

Given these circumstances, it is clear that any strategic approach pursued by the United States must focus not only on the near-term, but also on the longer term, if the United States is to compete effectively with China. Looking back over the first 20 years of China's WTO membership, and observing China's current leadership and clear policy direction, it would be appropriate to assume that the problems currently posed by China will be with us for some time, rather than expect that China will willingly make fundamental changes to its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade in the near-term or even the medium-term. Effective strategies for dealing with China also need to be flexible. The United States must be prepared to adapt and adjust its strategic approach over time as China's non-market practices evolve and as global trade patterns shift and alliances and interests change.

Accordingly, in the spirit of this Administration's worker-centered trade policy, the United States is now pursuing a multi-faceted strategic approach as it seeks to address the unique challenges posed by China and its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. While doing so, the United States is also working to ensure that we are taking the steps domestically to invest in, and build policies supportive of, the industries of today and tomorrow.

As one part of this strategic approach, the United States is continuing to pursue bilateral engagement with China and is seeking to find areas where some progress can be achieved. China is an important trading partner, and every avenue for obtaining real change in its trade regime must be utilized.

As an initial step, the United States is working to ensure that China lives up to its existing trade commitments, including the ones that China made in the Phase One Agreement. It is important for the bilateral relationship to demonstrate that commitments matter, and resolving outstanding compliance issues under the Phase One Agreement would provide a solid foundation for future bilateral engagement.

At the same time, the United States is engaging China on issues that are a priority for the Biden-Harris Administration. In this regard, it is clear that prior U.S. efforts have not led to fundamental changes in China's trade regime, and many serious challenges remain, including in the wake of the Phase One Agreement. Priority concerns include China's problematic industrial policies and the wide array of measures that support them, massive subsidization, the non-market activities of state enterprises, severe and persistent excess capacity, forced technology transfer, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, forced labor and economic coercion. Ultimately, it will be up to China to decide whether and to what extent it is willing to work constructively with the United States to address these concerns.

The use of domestic trade tools is also a key focus of U.S. trade policy toward China. To the extent that China's unfair, non-market and distortive policies and practices persist, the United States is prepared to use domestic trade tools strategically as needed in order to achieve a more level playing field with China for U.S. workers and businesses.

It is also apparent that existing trade tools need to be strengthened, and new trade tools need to be forged. China pursues unfair policies and practices that were not contemplated when many of the U.S. trade statutes were drafted decades ago, and we are therefore exploring ways in which to update our trade tools to counter them.

However, the United States cannot do it alone. There are limits to bilateral engagement and the impact of domestic trade tools. That is why the United States is working more intensely and broadly with allies and like-minded partners. Just as we are reassessing our domestic trade tools, we are also re-thinking how the United States engages with its trading partners to address the challenges that China poses for the global economy. As more and more U.S. allies and like-minded partners come to understand the need for new approaches to China, the United States is working more intensely and broadly with them, both in existing international trade fora and initiatives and in new ones. The coronavirus pandemic, and its impacts on supply chains and global economic conditions, have laid bare the vulnerabilities and interdependencies of global economies and have underscored the need for new coalitions to build up economic security and resiliency. There is a strong need for new thinking and new coalitions of allies and like-minded partners, including not only on a bilateral basis ― especially with major trading partners ― but also regionally and multilaterally, to find global solutions to the many serious problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

As part of this effort, the United States is continuing to work directly with like-minded trading partners outside of a multilateral organization context in pursuit of new initiatives to explore strategies for addressing the unique problems posed by non-market policies and practices. For example, the United States and the European Union (EU) have established a Trade and Technology Council, and the United States and Japan have established a Partnership for Trade. In both venues, one important component of the engagement focuses on better understanding and developing strategies for addressing non-market policies and practices. The United States, the EU and Japan have also re-started their trilateral work, agreeing to focus on three initial objectives: (1) identification of problems due to non-market practices; (2) identification of gaps in existing enforcement tools, and where further work is needed to develop new tools to address such practices, as well as discussing cooperation in utilizing existing tools; and (3) identification of areas where further work is needed to develop rules to address such practices. The three trading partners also highlighted the importance of WTO reform in an effort to build a free and fair rules-based multilateral trading system that benefits all its members and helps secure shared prosperity for all.

The United States is also holding discussions with many other like-minded trading partners, including in the Indo-Pacific region, on how to strengthen our existing trade relationships. Given that trade with China poses so many serious risks and potential harms, the United States believes that market economies should enhance their trade with each other.

As part of its discussions with like-minded trading partners, the United States is also working to make critical supply chains less vulnerable and more secure, sustainable and resilient. The United States recognizes the need to cooperate with trading partners to diversify international suppliers and reduce geographic concentration risk, especially in China, and to address vulnerabilities that can result in shortages of key goods. This joint work can also enable more effective responses to unfair, non-market and distortive policies and practices that have eroded critical supply chains.

At the same time, the United States is continuing to pursue initiatives at the WTO as well as in fora such as the G7, the G20 and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. For example, at the WTO, the U.S. agenda includes pushing for and building support for meaningful WTO reforms to update the organization and respond to the experiences since its inception, including China's accession to the WTO. One U.S. proposal relates to "special and differential treatment," where certain WTO members rely on self-declared developing country status to inappropriately seek "special and differential treatment" to avoid making meaningful commitments in WTO negotiations. The United States has also offered, and will continue to pursue, proposals to respond to certain practices of China and other non-market economies. They include a proposal intended to increase consequences for WTO members who fail to adequately notify industrial subsidies. Additionally, together with like-minded partners, the United States has proposed that the WTO adopt a joint statement on the importance of market-oriented conditions for fair trade, thereby drawing a contrast to non-market economic practices, with the aim of shaping future WTO reform discussions. Although many other WTO members agree with the goals of these proposals, other concerns, including wanting to avoid confronting China and incurring China's economic retaliation, appear to have limited public support among WTO members. Although WTO members may not adopt meaningful reforms in these areas in the near-term, it is vital for the United States to take a leadership role in putting these challenges on the agenda.