INTRODUCTION In July of 1986, China applied for admission to the WTO's predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The GATT formed a Working Party in March of 1987, composed of all interested GATT contracting parties, to examine China's application and negotiate terms for China's accession. For the next eight years, negotiations were conducted under the auspices of the GATT Working Party. Following the formation of the WTO on January 1, 1995, pursuant to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), a successor WTO Working Party, composed of all interested WTO members, took over the negotiations. Like all WTO accession negotiations, the negotiations with China had three basic aspects. First, China provided information to the Working Party regarding its trade regime. China also updated this information periodically during the 15 years of negotiations to reflect changes in its trade regime. Second, each interested WTO member negotiated bilaterally with China regarding market access concessions and commitments in the goods and services areas, including, for example, the tariffs that would apply on industrial and agricultural goods and the commitments that China would make to open up its market to foreign services suppliers. The most trade liberalizing of the concessions and commitments obtained through these bilateral negotiations were consolidated into China's Goods and Services Schedules and apply to all WTO members. Third, overlapping in time with these bilateral negotiations, China engaged in multilateral negotiations with Working Party members on the rules that would govern trade with China. Throughout these multilateral negotiations, U.S. leadership in working with China was critical to removing obstacles to China's WTO accession and achieving a consensus on appropriate rules commitments. These commitments are set forth in China's Protocol of Accession and an accompanying Report of the Working Party. WTO members formally approved an agreement on the terms of accession for China on November 10, 2001, at the WTO's Fourth Ministerial Conference, held in Doha, Qatar. One day later, China signed the agreement and deposited its instrument of ratification with the Director-General of the WTO. China became the 143rd member of the WTO on December 11, 2001. China's Protocol of Accession, accompanying Working Party Report, and Goods and Services Schedules are available on the WTO's website (www.wto.org). To accede to the WTO, China agreed to take concrete steps to remove trade barriers and open its markets to foreign companies and their exports from the first day of accession in virtually every product sector and for a wide range of services. Supporting these steps, China also agreed to undertake important changes to its legal framework, designed to add transparency and predictability to business dealings. Like all acceding WTO members, China also agreed to assume the obligations of more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements, covering all areas of trade. Areas of principal concern to the United States and China's other trading partners, as evidenced by the accession negotiations, included core principles of the WTO, such as most-favored nation (MFN) treatment, national treatment, transparency, and the availability of independent review of administrative decisions. Other key concerns arose in the areas of agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures, technical barriers to trade, trade-related investment measures, customs valuation, rules of origin, import licensing, antidumping, subsidies and countervailing measures, trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights, and services. For some of its obligations in these areas, China was allowed minimal transition periods, where it was considered necessary. Through its membership in the WTO, China also became subject to the same expectations as other WTO members, as set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, among other things, WTO members expressly affirmed their view that the WTO member economies would participate in the international trading system based on “open, market-oriented policies.” Even though the terms of China's accession agreement are directed at the opening of China's market to WTO members, China's accession agreement also includes provisions designed to address issues related to any injury that U.S. or other WTO members' industries and workers might experience based on import surges or unfair trade practices, particularly during what was envisioned to be a time of transition for China from a non-market economy to a market economy. These mechanisms include: (1) a special textile safeguard mechanism (which expired on December 11, 2008, seven years after China's WTO accession); (2) a unique, Chinaspecific safeguard mechanism allowing a WTO member to take action against increasing Chinese imports that disrupt its market (which expired on December 11, 2013, 12 years after China's WTO accession); (3) an expression of the ability of WTO members to use an antidumping methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market economy conditions prevail in the industry producing the like product with regard to the manufacture, production, and sale of that product; and (4) an expression of the ability to use methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits to Chinese enterprises that are not based on terms and conditions prevailing in China. With China's consent, the WTO also created a special multilateral mechanism for reviewing China's compliance on an annual basis. Known as the Transitional Review Mechanism, this mechanism operated annually for eight years after China's accession. A final review, looking back over the first 10 years of China's WTO membership, took place in 2011.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In our 2017 and 2018 reports, we provided the Administration's assessment of China's WTO membership, the unique and very serious challenges that China's trade policies and practices pose for the multilateral trading system and the effectiveness of the strategies that had been pursued to address the China problem in prior years. We also identified the critical need for new and more effective strategies – including taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – to address the challenges presented by China's non-market economic system. In this year's report, we focus on the positive outcomes to date of the Administration's new and more effective strategy for engaging China, which has led to the signing of an historic trade agreement with China. We also highlight the important issues that remain to be addressed in our trade relationship with China. As we previously documented, China's record of compliance with WTO rules has been poor. China has continued to embrace a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade, despite WTO members' expectations – and China's own representations – that China would transform its economy and pursue the open, market-oriented policies endorsed by the WTO. At the same time, China's non-market approach has imposed, and continues to impose, substantial costs on WTO members. Over the past nearly two decades, a variety of bilateral and multilateral efforts were pursued by the United States and other WTO members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. However, even though these efforts were persistent, they did not result in meaningful changes in China's approach to the economy and trade. In our past reports, we identified and explained the numerous policies and practices pursued by China that harm and disadvantage U.S. companies and workers, often severely. We also catalogued the United States' persistent yet unsuccessful efforts to resolve the many concerns that have arisen in our trade relationship with China. We found that a consistent pattern existed where the United States raised a particular concern, China specifically promised to address that concern, and China's promise was not fulfilled. The costs associated with China's unfair and distortive policies and practices have been substantial. For example, China's non-market economic system and the industrial policies that flow from it have systematically distorted critical sectors of the global economy such as steel and aluminum, devastating markets in the United States and other industrialized countries. China also continues to block valuable sectors of its economy from foreign competition, particularly services sectors. At the same time, China's industrial policies are increasingly responsible for displacing companies in new, emerging sectors of the global economy, as the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party powerfully intervene on behalf of China's domestic industries. Companies in economies disciplined by the market cannot effectively compete with both Chinese companies and the Chinese state. Faced with these realities, this Administration announced two years ago that it would be pursuing a new, more aggressive approach to the United States' engagement of China. We explained that the Administration would defend U.S. companies and workers from China's unfair trading practices and would seek to restore balance to the trade relationship between the United States and China. As part of these efforts, the United States would take all appropriate actions to ensure that the costs of China's non-market economic system are borne by China, not by the United States. The United States also would continue to encourage China to make fundamental structural changes to its approach to the economy and trade consistent with the open, market-oriented approach pursued by other WTO members, which is rooted in the principles of non-discrimination, market access, reciprocity, fairness, and transparency. As we explained, if undertaken by China, these changes would do more than simply ease the growing trade tensions with its trading partners. These changes would also benefit China, by placing its economy on a more sustainable path, and would contribute to the growth of the U.S. economy and the global economy. The Administration based this new approach on the following assessments: (1) WTO membership comes with expectations that an acceding member not only will strictly adhere to WTO rules, but also will support and pursue open, market-oriented policies; (2) China has failed to comply with these expectations; (3) in recent years, China has moved further away from open, market-oriented policies and has more fully embraced a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade; and (4) China's market-distorting policies and practices harm and disadvantage its fellow WTO members, even as China reaps enormous benefits from its WTO membership. Consistent with this more aggressive approach to China, the Administration is now using all available tools – including domestic trade remedies, bilateral negotiations, WTO litigation, and strategic engagement with like-minded trading partners – to respond to the unique and very serious challenges presented by China. But, the goal for the United States remains the same. The United States seeks a trade relationship with China that is fair, reciprocal, and balanced. Over the past year, the United States' new approach to China began to demonstrate key progress with the signing of a “Phase One” economic and trade agreement in January 2020. This historic agreement requires structural reforms and other changes to China's economic and trade regime in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, and currency and foreign exchange. The agreement also includes a commitment by China that it will make substantial additional purchases of U.S. goods and services in the coming years. Importantly, the agreement establishes a strong dispute resolution system that ensures prompt and effective implementation and enforcement. Because the Phase One agreement does not cover all of the United States' concerns, the United States will turn to Phase Two of its trade negotiations with China in order to secure resolutions to important outstanding issues. These discussions will focus on intellectual property, technology transfer, and services market access issues that were not addressed in the Phase One agreement as well as critical issues in areas such as excess capacity, subsidies, state-owned enterprises, cybersecurity, data localization and cross-border data transfers, pharmaceuticals and medical devices, competition law enforcement, regulatory transparency, and standards.

U.S. ASSESSMENT OF CHINA'S WTO MEMBERSHIP EXPECTATIONS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP For all WTO members, the expectations of WTO membership are clearly set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, WTO members expressly affirmed their view that the establishment of the WTO ushers in a “new era of global economic cooperation” that “reflect[s] the widespread desire to operate in a fairer and more open multilateral trading system.” WTO members further made clear their determination that their economies would participate in the international trading system, based on both “open, marketoriented policies” and “the commitments set out in the Uruguay Round Agreements and Decisions.” As this language makes clear, it clearly was not contemplated that any WTO member would reject market-based policies in favor of a state-led trade regime. It also was not contemplated that any WTO member would pursue mercantilist outcomes instead of policies promoting a fairer and more open multilateral trading system. Rather, it was expected that each WTO member would pursue open, marketoriented policies designed to achieve more efficient outcomes. The pursuit of open, market-oriented policies means not only strictly adhering to the agreed rules but also observing in good faith the fundamental principles that run throughout the many WTO agreements, which include nondiscrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness, and transparency. When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it voluntarily agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and embed it in its trading system and institutions. Through China's commitments and representations, WTO members understood that China intended to dismantle existing state-led, mercantilist policies and practices, and they expected China to continue on its thenexisting path of economic reform and successfully complete a transformation to a market-oriented economy and trade regime. China's protocol of accession to the WTO sets out China's obligations under the WTO agreements as well as numerous additional China-specific commitments made necessary because of the need for China to transform its approach to the economy and trade. China itself acknowledged “the evolving nature of its economy,” and it confirmed that “a socialist market economy system was applied” in China. Similarly, WTO members highlighted that “China was continuing the process of transition towards a full market economy.” WTO members noted, for example, that “the special features of China's economy, in its present state of reform, still created the potential for a certain level of tradedistorting subsidization.” For these reasons, it was agreed that special safeguard-like provisions would be included among the terms of China's protocol of accession as protective measures while China completed its transformation into a market economy. For example, China's protocol of accession included a China-specific safeguard mechanism, special antidumping rules, and special methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits. It also created a unique, 10-year review mechanism designed to monitor China's progress in implementing its many WTO commitments and to secure updated information on the use of industrial plans by China.

Unfortunately, as discussed below, China has a poor record when it comes to complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based. Too often, China flouts the rules to achieve industrial policy objectives. In addition, and of more serious concern to the United States and other WTO members, China has not made sufficient progress in transitioning toward a market economy. China continues to embrace a state-led, non-market, and mercantilist approach to the economy and trade. This approach results in sophisticated and expansive policies and practices that often evade WTO disciplines and cause serious harm to markets, industries, and workers in the United States and other WTO Members. At the same time, China has used the benefits of WTO membership – including its guarantee of open, non-discriminatory access to the markets of other WTO Members – to become the WTO's largest trader, while resisting calls for further liberalization of its trade regime by claiming to be a “developing” country. In the following two sections, we summarize China's record in terms of complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based. We also summarize China's record in terms of transitioning to a market economy.

CHINA'S RECORD IN TERMS OF COMPLYING WITH WTO RULES Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based has not changed. China's record remains poor. As detailed in last year's report, China's trade regime has generated many WTO compliance concerns. Too often, WTO members have had to resort to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to change problematic Chinese policies and practices. The United States, for example, has brought nearly two dozen cases against China at the WTO covering a wide range of important policies and practices, such as: (1) local content requirements in the automobile sector; (2) discriminatory taxes in the integrated circuit sector; (3) hundreds of prohibited subsidies in a wide range of manufacturing sectors; (4) inadequate intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement in the copyright area; (5) significant market access barriers in copyright-intensive industries; (6) severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of financial information services; (7) export restraints on numerous raw materials; (8) a denial of market access for foreign suppliers of electronic payment services; (9) repeated abusive use of trade remedies; (10) excessive domestic support for key agricultural commodities; (11) the opaque and protectionist administration of tariff-rate quotas for key agricultural commodities; and (12) discriminatory regulations on technology licensing. Even though the United States has routinely prevailed in these WTO disputes, as have other WTO members in their disputes against China, they take years to litigate, consume significant resources, and often require further efforts when China resists complying with panel or Appellate Body rulings. China has been a particularly bad actor when it comes to trade remedies. While the use of trade remedies in a manner consistent with WTO rules is an important tool for protecting domestic industries from unfair and injurious trade practices, China has made a practice of launching antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) investigations that appear designed to discourage its trading partners from the legitimate exercise of their rights under WTO rules. This type of retaliatory conduct is not typical of WTO members, nor is it a legitimate basis for seeking AD and CVD relief. Moreover, when China has pursued AD and CVD investigations under these circumstances, it appears that its regulatory authorities have tended to move forward with the imposition of duties regardless of the strength of the underlying legal claims and evidence. The United States' three successful WTO cases challenging the duties imposed by China on imports of U.S. grain- oriented electrical steel (GOES), U.S. chicken broiler products, and U.S. automobiles offer telling examples of this problem. Indeed, China's poor behavior does not always stop after an adverse WTO ruling. In two of the three WTO cases brought by the United States on trade remedies, China did not comply with the WTO's rulings, and the United States was forced to bring Article 21.5 compliance proceedings to secure China's compliance. China's retaliatory use of trade remedies highlights another unique issue that WTO members face when dealing with China – the threat of reprisal. It is no secret that foreign companies are hesitant to speak publicly, or to be perceived as working with their governments to challenge China's trade policies or practices, because they fear retaliation from the Chinese state. A study by one U.S. industry association noted that foreign companies confidentially have reported receiving explicit or implicit threats from Chinese government officials – typically made orally rather than in writing – about possible retaliatory actions that could have severe repercussions for a company's business prospects in China. At the same time, it is also no secret that China threatens more vulnerable WTO members to dissuade them from speaking publicly against China. A further persistent problem is China's inadequate transparency. China disregards many of its WTO transparency obligations, which places its trading partners at a disadvantage and often serves as a cloak for China to conceal unfair trade policies and practices from scrutiny. For example, for the first 15 years of its WTO membership, China failed to notify any sub-central government subsidies to the WTO, despite the fact that most subsidies in China emanate from provincial and local governments. The magnitude and significance of this problem is illustrated by the five WTO cases that the United States has brought challenging prohibited subsidies maintained by China. While those cases involved hundreds of subsidies, most of the subsidies were provided by sub-central governments. The United States was able to bring those cases only because of its own extensive investigatory efforts to uncover China's opaque subsidization practices. Most other WTO members lack the resources to conduct the same types of investigations. Today, China continues to shield massive sub-central government subsidies from the scrutiny of WTO members. Together with other non-market practices, these subsidies contribute to the serious excess capacity problems that plague industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels, and fishing and devastate global markets and foreign competitors. Industrial plans such as Made in China 2025, which reportedly targets 10 advanced manufacturing sectors in China with hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies, inevitably will create a new wave of industries with severe excess capacity to the detriment of China's trading partners. For years, the United States has urged China to change the behaviors described above and become a responsible member of the WTO. In the future, the United States will continue this effort. The United States also will continue to use the WTO dispute settlement mechanism as an enforcement tool as appropriate and will continue working through WTO committees and councils and other WTO bodies to seek effective actions to curb problematic Chinese policies and practices.

CHINA'S RECORD IN TERMS OF TRANSITIONING TO A MARKET ECONOMY Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of transitioning to a market economy has not changed. Nearly two decades after its accession to the WTO, China has still not embraced open, market-oriented policies. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve industrial policy objectives. As we detailed in last year's report, China pursues a wide array of continually evolving interventionist policies and practices aimed at limiting market access for imported goods and services and restricting the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China. At the same time, it offers substantial government guidance, resources, and regulatory support to Chinese industries. The principal beneficiaries of China's policies and practices are China's stateowned enterprises and numerous other significant domestic companies, sometimes referred to as “national champions,” that are attempting to move up the economic value chain. The benefits that Chinese industry realizes largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their companies and workers. As a result of China's industrial policies, markets all over the world are less efficient than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China. This situation has worsened in recent years. Since new leaders assumed power in China in 2013, the state's role in the economy – effectuated by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the Chinese Communist Party – has grown. While China has repeatedly signaled in recent years that it is pursuing “economic reform,” China's concept of “economic reform” differs from the type of change that a country would be pursuing if it were embracing open, market-oriented principles. For China, “economic reform” appears to mean perfecting the management of the economy by the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party and strengthening the state sector, particularly stateowned enterprises. Meanwhile, as the state's role in the economy has increased in recent years, the depth and breadth of concerns facing U.S. and other foreign companies doing business in China – or competing with favored Chinese companies in markets outside of China – have similarly increased. To fully appreciate the challenges presented by China's non-market economy, it is vital to understand the extent to which the state still maintains control over economic decision-making in China. As we catalogued in last year's report, a thorough examination of China's Constitution, relevant directives and pronouncements by China's leadership, legislative and regulatory measures issued by the Chinese government, China's industrial plans, and the actions of the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party leaves no doubt that the Chinese state maintains a tight grip on virtually all economic activity. Indeed, the government and the Party have constitutional mandates to develop a “socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics.” To fulfill these mandates, the framework of China's economy is set by the government and the Party, which exercise control directly and indirectly over the allocation of resources through instruments such as government ownership and control of key economic actors and innumerable government directives. The government and the Party also direct and channel economic actors to meet the state's planning targets. The government and the Party permit market forces to operate only to the extent that they accord with the objectives of national economic and industrial policies. When there is conflict between market outcomes and state objectives, the government and the Party intervene to ensure that the state's objectives prevail. Aside from the role of the government and the Party in managing the economy, there are also serious concerns over how the government and the Party exercise influence over the operations and investment decisions of both state-owned enterprises and private companies, including foreign-invested enterprises. This influence appears to be growing, as the Party is increasing its control over key actors in China's economy and not, as had been hoped, enabling China's transition to a market economy. China claims that its state-owned enterprises make business decisions independently of the state and based on market principles. However, the government and the Party continue to exercise control over state-owned enterprises. Among other things, they appoint and control key executives through the Chinese Communist Party Organization Department. They also provide state-owned enterprises with preferential access to important inputs (such as land and capital) and other competitive advantages unavailable to private Chinese companies. State-owned enterprises, in turn, play an outsized role in China's economy. For example, state-owned enterprises outstrip private Chinese companies in terms of their share of total credit, their market dominance in key industries, and their share of total market capitalization on China's stock market. Both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies also host internal Party committees capable of exercising government and Party influence over their corporate governance and business decisions. This arrangement is actually codified in Chinese law under Article 19 of the Company Law, which applies to both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies. In recent years, moreover, the Party has taken steps to increase the strength and presence of Party committees within all of these companies. For example, state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies are being pressured to amend their articles of association to ensure Party representation on their boards of directors, usually as the Chairman of the Board, and to ensure that important company decisions are made in consultation with Party cells. As we explained in last year's report, industry associations report that the Party is also taking steps to influence the managerial and investment decisions of foreign-invested enterprises in China through the insertion of Party cells. According to these reports, these efforts in some cases are beginning to affect the decision-making processes of some Chinese-foreign joint ventures in China. Further reinforcing the Party's influence over enterprises in China is the Social Credit System, a new tool endorsed by the Party that the government will be using to monitor, rate, and condition not only the conduct of all individuals in China, but also all domestic and foreign companies in China. This system is expected to become fully operational in 2020. While details are still emerging, it appears that the government will use the Social Credit System, among other things, to ensure that economic actors follow China's industrial plans. Separate from these various mechanisms used to control company behavior, the government and the Party continue to control or otherwise influence the prices of key factors of production. The result is that the means of production in China are not allocated or priced according to market principles. For example, all land in China is property of the state, as either state-owned urban land or collectively owned rural land. The state also exerts a high degree of control over energy and other input prices. In addition, there are significant institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management. China denies workers the right of association and the right to organize and collectively bargain. China prohibits the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, and workers do not have the legal right to strike, which is an important lever in collective action and negotiation with management over wages in market economies. In addition, government restrictions on labor mobility continue to inhibit and guide labor flows, causing distortions on the supply side of the labor market. The government and the Party also exercise strong control over the financial sector. Five large commercial banks that are majority state-owned entities operate large branch networks on a nationwide basis and account for nearly half of total bank assets. There are also three large state-owned policy banks, as well as scores of city commercial banks and credit unions under local government control. In addition to the ownership of these banks by the government, the state exercises other forms of influence over banking decisions. The Party, through its Organization Department, appoints executives in state-owned banks and other stateowned financial institutions. China's central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), also meets frequently with large banks in China to ensure that their lending decisions align with PBOC and government objectives. In addition, the Law on Commercial Banks provides that “commercial banks are to conduct their business of lending in accordance with the needs of national economic and social development and under the guidance of the industrial policies of the state.” Similarly, China's legal system continues to function as an instrument by which the government and the Party can secure discrete economic outcomes, channel broader economic policy and pursue industrial policy objectives. Key legal institutions, such as the courts, are structured to respond to the Party's direction, both broadly and on a case-specific basis. As a general matter, to the extent that companies and individuals seek to act independently of government or Party direction, the legal system does not provide a venue for them to achieve these objectives on a systemic or consistent basis. In addition, companies and individuals continue to face challenges in obtaining impartial outcomes, either because of local protectionism or corruption. The larger issue of China's restrictions on the freedom of information also impacts China's economic system. For example, while China's Internet firewall and the Party's regular censorship of audio-visual and print media have many negative effects outside China's economic system, they also create distortions in China's economy, and these distortions affect the ability of foreign companies to operate and compete effectively in China's market. China is currently in the last year of its 13th five-year planning cycle and is busily preparing for the issuance of its 14th five-year plan, which will run from 2021 through 2025. Like the 13th five-year plan, the 14th five-year plan will cover all sectors of China's economy and will not be limited to one overarching plan, but instead will include hundreds and hundreds of sub-plans. In this regard, various institutions participate in plan formulation and execution, including central government bodies with legislative and regulatory authority, thousands of provincial and local government authorities, various organs of the Party, and key Chinese companies. When compared to the industrial policies of other WTO members, China's industrial plans are fundamentally different. In several significant ways, China's industrial plans go well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries. First, adherence to the objectives of China's industrial plans is effectively mandatory. Chinese companies have little discretion to ignore them, even when market forces would dictate different commercial behavior. Second, the financial support that the state provides to domestic industries in support of China's industrial plans is significantly larger than in other countries, and it is not limited to funding for research and development (R&D). The state also provides massive, marketdistorting financial support to the ongoing operations of China's domestic industries. This support often leads to severe excess capacity in China – followed by China's widespread dumping of the inevitable excess production into the markets of other WTO members. This assault on global markets can cause serious harm to other WTO members' industries and workers. The WTO does not provide effective mechanisms for addressing this problem. Third, China actively seeks to help its domestic producers through myriad additional policies and practices that impede, disadvantage, and harm the foreign competition and skew the playing field against imported goods and services and foreign manufacturers and services suppliers. When combined with China's large size and large share of global trade, the policies and practices that China pursues in support of its industrial plans transform China into a unique and pressing problem for the WTO and the multilateral trading system. Moreover, this troubling situation is not static. New mechanisms to maintain and enhance the state's control over the economy in China continue to emerge.

A sampling of these problematic non-market policies and practices includes: State-sponsored, cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property, trade secrets, and knowhow is conducted for the commercial benefit of Chinese companies. • • China pursues forced technology transfer through various means. • China requires state-owned enterprises to play a large role in the economy and accords them numerous competitive preferences, to the detriment of foreign companies, both in China's market and abroad. • China imposes unique national standards strategically, both to promote the dominance in China's market by Chinese companies and to serve the interests of Chinese companies seeking to compete globally. • China uses competition law enforcement to achieve industrial policy objectives. • China uses cybersecurity as a pretext to discriminate against foreign information communications technology (ICT) products and services and to promote the substitution of domestic ICT products and services in sectors throughout the Chinese economy. • China manages the export of many primary, intermediate, and downstream industrial products by strategically raising or lowering the value-added tax (VAT) rebate available upon export, typically in order to lower the domestic prices of inputs and to provide China's finished products with significant competitive advantages over foreign producers. • China is rolling out a new Social Credit System, which apparently will be used to monitor, rate, and condition the conduct of all companies in China, including foreign companies, in an effort to ensure, among other things, that they operate in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives. It is clear, moreover, that the trade policies and practices generated by China's non-market economic system have caused serious harm to China's fellow WTO members. As it currently operates, China's non-market economic system is not compatible with economic systems that operate on market principles, and significant and farreaching adjustments are, therefore, critically needed. As we detailed in last year's report, one significant result of China's non-market economic system is the creation of excess capacity – that is, capacity that would not have been created and would not persist if market forces were operating properly. Excess capacity is a sign that resources are not being allocated in an efficient manner. In the past, China itself has acknowledged excess capacity in several industries, including steel, cement, electrolytic aluminum, flat glass, and shipbuilding. Numerous other excess capacity industries have been identified by industry associations in the United States and other countries. Looking ahead, some of the Chinese industries most likely to inflict the disastrous consequences of severe excess capacity on the world in the future can be found in the Made in China 2025 industrial plan. Through that industrial plan, the Chinese government is seeking to create dominant companies in 10 advanced manufacturing sectors, which include advanced information technology, robotics and automated machine tools, aircraft and aircraft components, maritime vessels and marine engineering equipment, advanced rail equipment, new energy vehicles, electrical generation and transmission equipment, agricultural machinery, new materials, and pharmaceuticals and medical devices. By some estimates, the Chinese government is making available more than $500 billion of financial support to these sectors, both through Made in China 2025 and related industrial plans. Based on the recent history of the steel and aluminum industries, China's non-market distortions in these newer sectors will likely result in oversupply, leading to loss of jobs and production in market economies. Another example of the harm that can be caused by China's non-market economic system involves forced technology transfer. In USTR's recent Section 301 investigation, USTR issued two extensive factual reports that highlighted industrial plans like Made in China 2025 and detailed how the Chinese government uses foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal joint venture requirements, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. The reports also explained how China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. In addition, the reports analyzed how the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese entities to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by state industrial plans. Finally, the reports illustrated how the Chinese government has conducted or supported cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, with the targets being intellectual property and sensitive commercial information held by U.S. firms. While these reports focused on the harm caused to U.S. interests, it is not a problem borne solely by the United States. As in the case of excess capacity, China's unfair policies and practices relating to forced technology transfer also affect other WTO members whose companies have developed or are developing advanced technologies.

Even in the absence of severe excess capacity or forced technology transfer policies and practices, China's non-market economic system causes serious harm to industries and workers in the United States and other WTO members. This harm occurs because Chinese companies use the artificial competitive advantages provided to them by the interventionist policies and practices of the Chinese state to undersell their foreign competition. The extent of this harm to foreign manufacturers is reflected in the very large number of antidumping and countervailing duty investigations that have been initiated against China by the investigating authorities of WTO members. Since China joined the WTO in 2001, it has been the number one target of WTO members' investigating authorities for both antidumping and countervailing duty investigations. One key reason why exports from China are subject so often to investigations by other WTO members' investigating authorities is China's economic system, which is fundamentally different from the open, market-oriented economic systems found in other WTO members. When a sectoral industrial plan directs China's domestic companies to produce certain types of products or products in certain quantities or allocates billions of dollars of financial support to manufacture advanced, new products, price distortions are inevitable. The relationships that a government tolerates among domestic businesses also can create market distortions. For example, when a government tolerates conduct that leads to widespread, competition-inhibiting behavior or crosssubsidization among companies in a domestic industry (as in Chinese industries dominated by state-owned enterprises), it can provide the domestic companies with unfair advantages over their foreign counterparts.

PREVIOUS EFFORTS TO ADDRESS TRADE DISTORTIONS CAUSED BY CHINA Following China's accession to the WTO, the United States repeatedly tried to work with China in a cooperative manner. Through many years of intensive, high-level dialogues, the United States urged China to pursue market-based policies and practices and to become a more responsible member of the WTO. These efforts largely failed because the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party were not sufficiently committed to adopting a true market economy or taking on a more responsible role at the WTO. As detailed in our 2017 and 2018 reports, the United States pursued various formal, high-level dialogues with China over the years, including previous dialogues like the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT), the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED), and the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED). In addition, a new dialogue known as the U.S.-China Comprehensive Economic Dialogue (CED) was launched under this Administration in April 2017. While the United States approached these dialogues in good faith and put a great deal of effort into them, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States did secure broad commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but China repeatedly failed to follow through on those commitments. Over the years, the United States has also made full use of available multilateral mechanisms to address its concerns with China. However, these mechanisms, too, have proved incapable of fundamentally changing a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system.

The United States actively participated in meetings at the WTO addressing China and its adherence to its WTO obligations, such as the numerous Chinaspecific Transitional Review Mechanism meetings from 2002 through 2011. However, China consistently approached these meetings in ways that frustrated WTO members' efforts to secure a meaningful assessment of China's compliance efforts. The United States also raised, and continues to raise, China-related issues at regular meetings of WTO committees and councils, including the WTO's General Council. During meetings in 2019, the United States repeatedly highlighted how China's trade-disruptive economic model works, the costs that it exacts from other WTO members, and the benefits that China receives from it. While these efforts have raised awareness among WTO members, they have not led to meaningful changes in China's approach to trade. In addition to these efforts, the United States has actively pursued WTO dispute settlement cases against China. To date, the United States has brought nearly two dozen WTO cases against China and has routinely prevailed in these disputes. However, as has become clear, the dispute settlement mechanism is of only limited value in addressing a situation where a WTO member is dedicated to a state-led trade regime that prevails over market forces. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is designed to address good faith disputes in which one member believes that another member has adopted a measure or taken an action that breaches a WTO obligation. This mechanism is not designed to address a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system. No amount of WTO dispute settlement by other WTO members would be sufficient to remedy this systemic problem. Indeed, many of the most harmful policies and practices being pursued by China are not even directly disciplined by WTO rules. In theory, the WTO membership could adopt new rules requiring members like China to abandon nonmarket economic systems and state-led, mercantilist trade regimes. For several reasons, however, it is unrealistic to expect success in any negotiation of new WTO rules that would change China's current approach to the economy and trade in a meaningful way. First, new WTO rules disciplining China would require agreement among all WTO members, including China. China has shown no willingness to consider fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime, and it is therefore highly unlikely that China would agree to new disciplines targeted at its trade policies and practices. Indeed, in connection with ongoing discussions at the WTO relating to needed WTO reform, China has stated that it would not alter its non-market economic system. Second, China has a long record of not pursuing ambitious outcomes at the WTO. Past agreements, even relatively narrow ones, have been difficult to achieve, and when an agreement is achieved, it is significantly less ambitious because of China's participation. In the United States' view, like-minded WTO members should focus their efforts on developing and implementing effective strategies for fixing the unique and very serious problems posed by China and its trade regime. Given the limits of the current WTO rules and mechanisms, these strategies initially must include actions not currently set out in the WTO agreements, given the serious trade distortions and harm currently being caused by China's approach to the economy and trade. Until the United States and other WTO members are able to successfully persuade China to make the needed fundamental changes to its trade regime, the serious harm caused by China's approach to the economy and trade will persist and grow. In sum, as we have made clear in prior reports, it is unrealistic to believe that actions at the WTO alone would be sufficient to force or persuade China to make fundamental changes to its trade regime. The WTO system was designed for countries that are truly committed to market principles, not for an enormous country determined to maintain a stateled, non-market system. No matter how many cases are brought at the WTO, China can always find a way to engage in market-distorting practices. Furthermore, given the extent to which China has benefited from the current state of affairs, it is not likely to agree to effective new WTO disciplines on its behavior. Indeed, China has been using its WTO membership to develop rapidly. In 2001, when China acceded to the WTO, China's economy was the sixth largest in the world. China's economy is now four times larger than it was in 2001, and it is the second largest economy in the world. In addition, China rose to become the largest goods trader among WTO members. There can be no doubt that China has benefited enormously from its WTO membership even though it has not sought to transform its economic system or its trade regime as had been expected, and it has never fully complied with WTO rules. Given these facts, it seems clear that relying solely on the WTO and its mechanisms to address China's unfair trade practices is a recipe for failure.

NEW U.S. STRATEGY TO ADDRESS TRADE DISTORTIONS CAUSED BY CHINA The United States is committed to the defense of U.S. companies and workers from China's unfair trading practices and to the restoration of balance to the trade relationship between the United States and China. As the United States has previously announced, it intends to hold China accountable not only for strict adherence to the existing WTO rules, but also for any unfair and market-distorting trade practices that hurt U.S. workers, businesses, farmers, or ranchers. Until China transforms its approach to the economy and trade, the United States will take all appropriate actions to ensure that the costs of China's non-market economic system are borne by China, not by the United States. At the same time, the United States will continue to encourage China to make fundamental structural changes to its approach to the economy and trade consistent with the open, market-oriented approach pursued by other WTO members, which is rooted in the principles of non-discrimination, market access, reciprocity, fairness, and transparency. As China should recognize, these changes will do more than simply ease the growing trade tensions with its trading partners. These changes will also benefit China, by placing its economy on a more sustainable path, and will contribute to the growth of the U.S. economy and the global economy. Over the past three years, the United States has taken actions on several fronts, including under domestic law. These actions have already produced important tangible results. In August 2017, at the direction of President Trump and under the authority of Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, USTR conducted a wide-ranging investigation into China's unfair practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation. In March 2018, after a thorough review and analysis of the evidence, USTR issued a detailed report of its findings in the Section 301 investigation. With regard to each of four categories of policies and practices under investigation, USTR found that China had engaged in a range of unfair and harmful conduct. First, USTR found that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations, and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. firms. Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients. Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans.

Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, including trade secrets, and confidential business information, such as technical data, negotiating positions, and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. The purpose of these actions is to support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization, and economic development. Based on these findings, the President instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to pursue a dispute settlement case at the WTO to address certain discriminatory technology licensing measures maintained by China. This case was launched in March 2018, and the proceedings are ongoing. The President also instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to impose an additional tariff of 25 percent on approximately $50 billion worth of Chinese imports containing industrially significant technologies, including those related to China's Made in China 2025 industrial plan. These additional tariffs were imposed in two tranches, with $34 billion becoming effective in July 2018 and a further $16 billion becoming effective in August 2018. Finally, the President instructed the Secretary of the Treasury to address concerns about investment in the United States directed or facilitated by China in industries or technologies deemed important to the United States. Subsequently, in August 2018, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) was signed into law by the President. FIRRMA modernizes the tools for protecting the United States' critical technologies from harmful foreign acquisitions. It also strengthens a mechanism – administered by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) – for reviewing foreign investment in the United States for national security purposes and establishes a process for identifying emerging and foundational technologies that should be added to existing U.S. export controls. The Administration is implementing this legislation with a view toward addressing the concerns regarding state-directed investment in critical technologies identified in the Section 301 investigation. The Section 301 investigation and responsive actions prompted numerous high-level discussions between the United States and China. These discussions became more focused in May 2018, when the United States proposed specific structural changes for China to become more open and market-oriented. These structural changes included actions not only in the area of forced technology transfer, but also in areas such as tariffs and non-tariff barriers, intellectual property rights protection and enforcement, services market access, agricultural market access, and trade deficit reduction. Initially, China did not take any of the actions called for by the United States, nor did it commit that it would take any of those actions in the future. China's position was essentially that the United States should accept as sufficient China's past “reform and opening up” measures and China's plans for future “reform and opening up” measures. China did offer to make minor changes and modest increases in its purchases of U.S. goods and services, but even this offer was heavily conditioned. At the same time, instead of eliminating the unfair and harmful policies and practices catalogued in USTR's Section 301 findings, China decided without justification to impose additional tariffs on imports of U.S. goods. China imposed additional tariffs of $34 billion effective in July 2018 and a further $16 billion effective in August 2018. During this time, the United States continued to press China to make structural changes, but China did not offer anything meaningful. Faced with this intransigence and China's retaliatory tariffs, the U.S. Trade Representative took a supplemental action under Section 301 by imposing additional tariffs on a further $200 billion in Chinese imports, with the rate set at 10 percent effective in September 2018 and scheduled to rise to 25 percent in January 2019. On December 1, 2018, President Trump and China's President Xi met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, following a meeting of the G20 leaders. At this meeting, the Chinese side seemed to show more willingness to seriously engage with the United States. China's President Xi agreed with President Trump to begin negotiations on structural changes in China with respect to forced technology transfer, intellectual property protection, non-tariff barriers, cyber intrusions and cyber theft, services, and agriculture. It was also agreed that the United States would suspend raising the tariff rate from 10 percent to 25 percent on $200 billion of Chinese goods for 90 days while the two sides engaged in negotiations on the structural changes needed in China's trade regime and discussed China's additional purchases of U.S. goods and services. Absent a resolution within 90 days, the United States indicated that the 10 percent tariff rate would be raised to 25 percent on March 2, 2019. Soon after the summit meeting in Buenos Aires, the United States and China began intensive negotiations focused on forced technology transfer, intellectual property rights protection, non-tariff barriers, services market access, agricultural market access, and currency. By late February 2019, the two sides had made substantial progress, and the United States postponed indefinitely the tariff rate increase scheduled for March 2, 2019. However, in May 2019, as the two sides appeared to be getting close to concluding a comprehensive agreement, China chose to retreat from numerous commitments that it had previously made during the negotiations, and the negotiations stalled. As a result, at the direction of the President, the U.S. Trade Representative raised the tariff rate from 10 percent to 25 percent on $200 billion of Chinese goods effective May 10, 2019, an action that had originally been scheduled for January 1, 2019. The President also instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to initiate the process for imposing 25 percent tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet hit with tariffs. China again responded by imposing tariffs on U.S. goods in retaliation. On June 29, 2019, President Trump and President Xi met in Osaka, Japan, following a meeting of the G20 leaders. At this meeting, the two Presidents agreed to resume trade negotiations. In addition, President Xi agreed that China would immediately make substantial purchases of U.S. agricultural products, while President Trump agreed to hold off on imposing new tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet hit with tariffs. By August 1, 2019, China had demonstrated little progress in meeting its commitment to purchase U.S. agricultural products, and President Trump therefore instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to move forward with new tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet hit with tariffs. The U.S. Trade Representative subsequently issued a notice imposing 10 percent tariffs on $120 billion of Chinese goods effective September 1, 2019, and 10 percent tariffs on $160 billion of Chinese goods effective December 15, 2019. At President Trump's direction, after China announced additional retaliatory tariffs on U.S. goods, the U.S. Trade Representative announced that the United States was raising the tariff rate for the September 1 and December 15 tariffs from 10 percent to 15 percent and was seeking comments from interested parties on raising the tariff rate on the previously covered $250 billion of Chinese goods from 25 percent to 30 percent effective October 1, 2019. China subsequently issued an announcement stating that it would not further retaliate and that it was prepared to engage in further trade negotiations with the United States. In September 2019, as the two sides intensified their discussions, the United States postponed the October 1 tariff rate increase to October 15. Then, on October 11, the two sides announced that, in the near future, they would be finalizing a fully enforceable “Phase One” agreement addressing the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, and currency and exchange rate practices. The agreement was also to include commitments from China to purchase additional U.S. goods and services. At the same time, the United States agreed to suspend the tariff rate increase scheduled for October 15. In December 2019, the United States announced that the two sides had finalized the text of an historic economic and trade agreement. This “Phase One” agreement, which was formally signed in January 2020, marked the conclusion of the first phase of the U.S.-China trade discussions under the leadership of President Trump and President Xi. The Phase One agreement requires structural reforms and other changes to China's economic and trade regime in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, and currency and foreign exchange. The agreement also includes commitments by China to make substantial additional purchases of U.S. goods and services in the coming years. Importantly, the agreement establishes a strong dispute resolution system that ensures prompt and effective implementation and enforcement. In the area of intellectual property, the agreement addresses numerous longstanding concerns of a wide range of U.S. industries whose businesses depend on the protection of their creative ideas to remain competitive. Specifically, the agreement requires China to revise its legal and regulatory regimes in a number of ways in the areas of trade secrets, patents, pharmaceutical-related intellectual property, trademarks, and geographical indications. In addition, the agreement requires China to make numerous changes to its judicial procedures, to establish deterrent-level penalties, and to ensure the effective enforcement of judgments. China also must take numerous specific steps to increase and improve civil, administrative, and criminal enforcement against pirated and counterfeit goods.

In the area of technology transfer, the agreement addresses several of the unfair trade practices of China that were identified in USTR's Section 301 report. For the first time in any trade agreement, China agreed to end its longstanding practice of forcing or pressuring foreign companies to transfer their technology to Chinese companies as a condition for obtaining market access, securing administrative approvals, or receiving advantages from the Chinese government. China also committed to provide transparency, fairness, and due process in administrative proceedings and to ensure that technology transfer and licensing take place on market terms. Separately, China committed to refrain from directing or supporting outbound investments aimed at acquiring foreign technology pursuant to its distortive industrial plans. In the area of agriculture, the agreement addresses structural barriers to trade and will support a dramatic expansion of U.S. food, agriculture, and seafood product exports, increasing U.S. farm and fisheries income, generating more rural economic activity, and promoting job growth. A multitude of non-tariff barriers to U.S. agriculture and seafood products are addressed, including for meat, poultry, seafood, rice, dairy, infant formula, horticultural products, animal feed and feed additives, pet food, and products of agriculture biotechnology. In the area of financial services, the agreement addresses a number of longstanding trade and investment barriers to U.S. providers of a wide range of financial services, including banking, insurance, securities, credit rating, and electronic payment services, among others. The barriers being addressed include joint venture requirements, foreign equity limitations, and various discriminatory regulatory requirements. Removal of these barriers should allow U.S. financial service providers to compete on a more level playing field and expand their services export offerings in the China market. The agreement addresses unfair currency practices by requiring high-standard commitments to refrain from competitive devaluations and targeting of exchange rates, while promoting increased transparency and providing mechanisms for accountability and enforcement. This approach will help reinforce macroeconomic and exchange rate stability and ensure that China cannot use currency practices to unfairly compete against U.S. exporters. In addition to the structural changes required by it, the Phase One agreement includes commitments from China to import various U.S. goods and services over the next two years in a total amount that exceeds China's annual level of imports for those goods and services in 2017 by no less than $200 billion. China's commitments cover a variety of U.S. manufactured goods, food, agricultural, and seafood products, energy products, and services. China's increased imports of U.S. goods and services are expected to continue on this same trajectory for several years after 2021 and should contribute significantly to the rebalancing of the U.S.-China trade relationship. Finally, the agreement is fully enforceable. It establishes an arrangement that will ensure the effective implementation of the agreement and that will allow the two sides to resolve disputes in a fair and expeditious manner. This arrangement creates regular bilateral consultations at the principal level, the deputy level, and the working level. It also establishes strong procedures for addressing disputes related to the agreement and allows each side to take proportionate responsive actions that it deems appropriate when a dispute is not otherwise resolved. In light of the progress represented by the agreement, the United States decided to suspend indefinitely the 15 percent tariffs scheduled to be imposed on $160 billion of Chinese goods on December 15, 2019, and not to move forward with raising the tariff rate on $250 billion of Chinese goods from 25 percent to 30 percent. In addition, the United States decided to reduce from 15 percent to 7.5 percent the tariffs that it imposed on $120 billion of Chinese goods on September 1, 2019.

The United States will closely monitor China's progress in implementing the Phase One agreement and will fully utilize the arrangement set forth in that agreement for ensuring that China adheres to its obligations. It is critical that China fully and faithfully implement its commitments if the United States and China are to be successful in their pursuit of a trade relationship that is fair, reciprocal, and balanced. Because the Phase One agreement does not cover all of the United States' concerns, the United States will turn to Phase Two of its trade negotiations with China in order to secure resolutions to important outstanding issues. These discussions will focus on intellectual property, technology transfer, and services market access issues that were not addressed in the Phase One agreement as well as critical issues in areas such as excess capacity, subsidies, state-owned enterprises, cybersecurity, data localization and cross-border data transfers, pharmaceuticals and medical devices, competition law enforcement, regulatory transparency, and standards. At the same time, the United States will continue to work with trading partners that share our vision to take effective action to address market-distorting practices in China. Currently, the United States is working with the EU and Japan as part of a high-level trilateral partnership to address the systemic distortions caused by China's non-market economic system. This important partnership is examining potential new rules where existing rules are ineffective, including in the areas of industrial subsidies, state-owned enterprises, and forced technology transfer. The three partners have also discussed the need to reach out to and build consensus with other like-minded WTO members in these areas. In the United States' view, existing proposals by various WTO members for WTO reform seem only marginally focused on the China problem. While these reform proposals potentially could address some behaviors that make China an irresponsible member of the WTO, they do not directly address the serious threat that China and its state-led, mercantilist trade regime poses for individual WTO members and the multilateral trading system. Going forward, it is the United States' hope that China will continue to take our concerns seriously and engage with us on a productive basis. If China does so and the two sides are able to finalize and implement a comprehensive Phase Two agreement, it will benefit not only the United States, but also China itself and the rest of the WTO membership. It may also generate a willingness on the part of China to take on similar new disciplines at the WTO.

REVIEW OF TRADE MECHANISMS USED TO ENGAGE CHINA BILATERAL DIALOGUES As explained in the 2017 and 2018 reports, in April 2017, at a summit meeting in Mar-a-Lago, Florida, President Trump and China's President Xi agreed to the establishment of a new high-level dialogue structure for the United States and China, which included the Comprehensive Economic Dialogue (CED), the Diplomatic and Security Dialogue, the Law Enforcement and Cybersecurity Dialogue, and the Social and Cultural Dialogue. It was agreed that trade and investment issues would be addressed through the CED, whose mandate also extended to macroeconomic policy, financial stability, currency, and energy. The CED was chaired on the U.S. side by the Commerce Secretary and the Treasury Secretary and on the Chinese side by a Vice Premier. It supplanted two other high-level dialogues, the JCCT and the S&ED (see Box 1). Staff-level discussions under the auspices of the CED began shortly after the Mar-a-Lago summit meeting. One month later, in May 2017, the two sides agreed to certain initial results, which included five commitments from China. These commitments focused primarily on overdue actions by Chinese regulatory authorities, rather than any fundamental changes to China's trade regime. The most important of these commitments related to market access for U.S. beef, action on several outstanding applications for agricultural biotechnology approvals, and the licensing process for U.S. suppliers of electronic payment services. By the time of the first plenary meeting of the CED in July 2017, implementation of China's May 2017 commitments was already problematic. China had already backtracked on its beef commitment, gutting the market access that had been promised. On the commitment relating to agricultural biotechnology approvals, China took only one-half of the promised actions. Meanwhile, China showed no willingness at Box 1: Previous U.S.-China Dialogues JCCT: In 1983, the United States and China founded the JCCT as a government-to-government consultative mechanism between the U.S. Department of Commerce and a Ministry of Commerce predecessor, the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade. It was designed to provide a forum for discussing trade concerns and pursuing bilateral commercial opportunities. In 2003, President Bush and Premier Wen agreed to elevate the JCCT, with the Commerce Secretary and the U.S. Trade Representative chairing the U.S. side and a Vice Premier chairing the Chinese side. From 2004 through 2016, the JCCT held annual plenary meetings, while numerous JCCT working groups and sub-dialogues met throughout the year in areas such as industrial policies, competitiveness, intellectual property rights, structural issues, steel, agriculture, pharmaceuticals and medical devices, information technology, insurance, tourism, environment, commercial law, trade remedies, and statistics. SED: In 2006, President Bush and President Hu agreed to create a Strategic Economic Dialogue between the United States and China. The objectives of the SED were to help to ensure leaders of the two countries could address critical economic challenges facing their economies, to have a forum for discussing cross-cutting issues, and to make the most productive use of the existing bilateral commissions and dialogues. President Bush designated the Treasury Secretary to lead the U.S. side of this dialogue, with participation by Cabinet members from other U.S. agencies. President Hu designated a Vice Premier to lead the Chinese side, with participation from various ministers. The SED convened semiannually from 2006 through 2008. S&ED: In 2009, the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue was established by Presidents Obama and Hu. The S&ED included separate strategic and economic tracks and held plenary meetings annually. In the Economic Track, the two sides focused on four pillars of engagement: (1) promoting a strong recovery and achieving more sustainable and balanced growth; (2) promoting more resilient, open, and market-oriented financial systems; (3) strengthening trade and investment; and (4) strengthening the international financial architecture. The S&ED convened annually from 2009 to 2016. all to follow through on the licensing process for U.S. suppliers of electronic payment services. Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that the July 2017 CED meeting, chaired by the U.S. Commerce and Treasury Secretaries and a Chinese Vice Premier, proved unsuccessful. As has been previously reported, despite extensive discussion of a number of additional issues during the run-up to that meeting, the two sides made no progress on any of those issues, and no outcomes were achieved. In 2018, with high-level U.S.-China dialogues having proven to be unsatisfactory, the nature of the United States' discussions with China shifted. As explained in the Enforcement section below, the two sides engaged in comprehensive negotiations spurred by the findings and remedies put in place by the United States as a result of USTR's Section 301 investigation into four categories of conduct related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation.

MULTILATERAL FORA In 2019, as in prior years, the United States actively participated in meetings at the WTO addressing China and its adherence to its WTO obligations. Throughout the year, the United States raised Chinarelated issues at regular meetings of WTO committees and councils. The United States also brought its concerns about China to the attention of the WTO's General Council during several meetings in 2019. The concerns expressed by the United States for WTO members' consideration focused on, among other things, how China's trade-disruptive economic model works, the costs that it exacts from other WTO members, and the benefits that China receives from it. In 2019, the United States also continued to participate actively in the Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity, along with other G-20 members and interested members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The mission of the Global Forum is to enhance information-sharing among Global Forum members and to take steps to address the challenge of excess capacity in the steel sector. During its first three years of work, which ran until December 2019, the Global Forum sought to identify subsidies and other types of government support measures that cause market distortions and contribute to global excess capacity. China, which accounts for about one-half of global capacity and production, was a heavy focus of the Global Forum's discussions. When ministers met in October 2019 at the direction of G20 Leaders to decide how to continue the work of the Global Forum, China and Saudi Arabia were the only members that refused to participate in the Global Forum's future work. Faced with this refusal, the remaining members of the Global Forum underscored their commitment to continuing the work of the Global Forum, given that severe excess capacity continues to plague the steel industry, and real progress on addressing the challenges of that excess capacity has not yet been achieved.

ENFORCEMENT U.S. Laws In August 2017, in response to a Presidential memorandum, USTR initiated an investigation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended, focused on policies and practices of the Government of China related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation. USTR identified four categories of conduct subject to investigation. USTR explained that: (1) the Chinese government reportedly uses a variety of tools (including opaque approval processes, joint venture requirements, foreign equity limitations, and other mechanisms) to require or pressure the transfer of technologies and intellectual property to Chinese companies; (2) the Chinese government reportedly deprives U.S. companies of the ability to set market-based terms in technology licensing negotiations with Chinese companies; (3) the Chinese government reportedly intervenes in markets by directing or unfairly facilitating the acquisition of U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property; and (4) the Chinese government reportedly conducts or supports cyber-enabled theft and unauthorized intrusions into U.S. commercial computer networks. The notice invited written comments and information from interested parties and scheduled a public hearing, which was held in October 2017. technical data, negotiating positions and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. These actions support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization, and economic development.

In March 2018, after thoroughly analyzing the available evidence, USTR issued a report detailing the facts of its Section 301 investigation. With regard to each of the four categories of policies and practices under investigation, USTR found ample support for concluding that China had engaged in unfair and harmful conduct. Specifically, USTR found, first, that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations, and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. firms. Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. firms' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients. Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cuttingedge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans. Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, trade secrets, and confidential business information, including Based on these findings, the President directed that a range of responsive actions be taken. Specifically, the President instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to commence Section 301 procedures for imposing additional tariffs on imports of Chinese goods. The President also instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to initiate a WTO case to address certain discriminatory technology licensing measures maintained by China. In addition, the President instructed the Treasury Secretary to address concerns about investment in the United States directed or facilitated by China in industries or technologies deemed important to the United States.

In March 2018, as directed by the President, USTR initiated a WTO dispute settlement case on behalf of the United States challenging Chinese measures that deny foreign patent holders the ability to enforce their patent rights against a Chinese joint-venture partner after a technology transfer contract ends and that impose mandatory adverse contract terms that discriminate against and are less favorable for imported foreign technology as compared to Chinese technology. The progress made by this case is discussed below in the section on WTO Litigation. In May 2018, following the submission of written comments by interested parties and a public hearing on the proposed additional tariffs, the President instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to impose an additional duty of 25 percent on approximately $50 billion worth of Chinese imports containing industrially significant technologies, including those related to China's Made in China 2025 industrial plan. These additional tariffs were imposed in two tranches, with $34 billion becoming effective in July 2018 and a further $16 billion becoming effective in August 2018.

With regard to U.S. concerns relating to Chinese investment in technology-intensive sectors, the President announced in June 2018 that Congress had made significant progress toward passing legislation that would modernize the tools for protecting the United States' critical technologies from harmful foreign acquisitions. Indeed, this legislation not only strengthened the existing mechanism – administered by CFIUS – for reviewing foreign investment in the United States for national security purposes, but also created a process for identifying emerging and foundational technologies that should be added to existing U.S. export controls. The President accordingly directed the Administration to act promptly in implementing this legislation, once enacted, and to enforce it rigorously, with a view toward addressing the concerns regarding statedirected investment in critical technologies identified in the Section 301 investigation. In August 2018, faced with retaliatory tariffs imposed by China and a lack of progress in high-level discussions, the President directed the U.S. Trade Representative to take a supplemental action under Section 301. The U.S. Trade Representative accordingly imposed a further $200 billion in additional tariffs on Chinese imports, with the duty set at 10 percent effective in September 2018 and rising to 25 percent in January 2019. In November 2018, USTR issued a detailed update of its Section 301 report. This update examined whether China had decided to respond constructively to the United States' initial report. USTR confirmed that China had not fundamentally altered the unfair, unreasonable, and marketdistorting policies and practices that were the subject of the March 2018 report. Instead, China's responsive actions had been confined to imposing tariffs on U.S. goods in retaliation for the United States' efforts to address the harm caused by China's extensive unreasonable policies and practices designed to force or pressure the transfer of technology from U.S. companies to Chinese companies.

On December 1, 2018, President Trump and China's President Xi met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, following a meeting of the G20 leaders. At this meeting, the Chinese side seemed to show more willingness to seriously engage with the United States. Among other things, it was agreed that the United States would suspend raising the tariff rate from 10 percent to 25 percent on $200 billion of Chinese goods on January 1, 2019, for 90 days while the two sides engaged in intensive negotiations on the entire range of structural changes needed in China's trade regime as well as China's additional purchases of U.S. goods and services. President Trump indicated that the U.S. Trade Representative would lead the negotiations for the U.S. side. He also conveyed that, absent a resolution within 90 days, the 10 percent tariff rate would be raised to 25 percent on March 2, 2019. Soon after the summit meeting in Buenos Aires, the United States and China began intensive negotiations focused on forced technology transfer, intellectual property rights protection, non-tariff barriers, services market access, agricultural market access, and currency. By late February 2019, the two sides had made substantial progress, and the United States postponed the tariff rate increase scheduled for March 2, 2019, indefinitely. However, in May 2019, as the two sides appeared to be getting close to concluding a comprehensive agreement, China chose to retreat from numerous commitments that it had previously made during the negotiations, and the negotiations stalled. As a result, at the direction of the President, the U.S. Trade Representative raised the tariff rate from 10 percent to 25 percent on $200 billion of Chinese goods effective May 10, 2019, an action that had originally been scheduled for January 1, 2019. The President also instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to initiate the process for imposing 25 percent tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet subjected to additional tariffs. China again responded by imposing tariffs on U.S. goods in retaliation.

On June 29, 2019, President Trump and President Xi met in Osaka, Japan, following a meeting of the G20 leaders. At this meeting, the two Presidents agreed to resume trade negotiations. In addition, President Xi agreed that China would immediately make substantial purchases of U.S. agricultural products, while President Trump agreed to hold off on imposing new tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet subjected to additional tariffs. By August 1, 2019, China had demonstrated little progress in meeting its commitment to purchase U.S. agricultural products, and President Trump therefore instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to move forward with new tariffs on the $300 billion of Chinese products not yet subjected to additional tariffs. The U.S. Trade Representative subsequently issued a notice imposing 10 percent tariffs on $120 billion of Chinese goods effective September 1, 2019, and 10 percent tariffs on $160 billion of Chinese goods effective December 15, 2019. At President Trump's direction, after China announced additional retaliatory tariffs on U.S. goods, the U.S. Trade Representative announced that the United States was raising the tariff rate for the September 1 and December 15 tariffs from 10 percent to 15 percent and was seeking comments from interested parties on raising the tariff rate on the previously covered $250 billion of Chinese goods from 25 percent to 30 percent effective October 1, 2019. China subsequently issued an announcement stating that it would not further retaliate and that it was prepared to engage in further trade negotiations with the United States. In September 2019, as the two sides intensified their discussions, the United States postponed the October 1 tariff rate increase to October 15. Then, on October 11, the two sides announced that, in the near future, they would be finalizing a fully enforceable “Phase One” agreement addressing the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, and currency and exchange rate practices. The agreement was also to include commitments from China to purchase additional U.S. goods and services. At the same time, the United States agreed to suspend the tariff rate increase scheduled for October 15. In December 2019, the United States announced that the two sides had finalized the text of an historic economic and trade agreement. This “Phase One” agreement, which was formally signed in January 2020, requires structural reforms and other changes to China's economic and trade regime in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, and currency and foreign exchange. The agreement also includes a commitment by China that it will make substantial additional purchases of U.S. goods and services in the coming years. Importantly, the agreement establishes a strong dispute resolution system that ensures prompt and effective implementation and enforcement. In light of the progress represented by the agreement, the United States decided to suspend indefinitely the 15 percent tariffs scheduled to be imposed on $160 billion of Chinese goods on December 15, 2019, and not to move forward with raising the tariff rate on $250 billion of Chinese goods from 25 percent to 30 percent. In addition, the United States decided to reduce from 15 percent to 7.5 percent the tariffs that it imposed on $120 billion of Chinese goods on September 1, 2019.

WTO Litigation Separate from enforcement actions under U.S. law, the United States continued to pursue litigation at the WTO to hold China accountable for adherence to WTO rules in 2019. Key WTO dispute settlement cases being pursued by the United States are discussed below. In March 2018, the United States initiated a WTO case challenging Chinese measures that deny foreign patent holders the ability to enforce their patent rights against a Chinese joint-venture partner after a technology transfer contract ends and that impose mandatory adverse contract terms that discriminate against and are less favorable for imported foreign technology as compared to Chinese technology. Consultations took place in August 2018, and a panel was established to hear the case at the United States' request in November 2018. In March 2019, China announced the withdrawal of certain measures that the United States had challenged in its panel request. After China's announcement, the WTO panel suspended its work at the request of the United States in light of ongoing consultations between the United States and China to resolve their dispute. In December 2016, the United States launched a WTO case challenging China's administration of tariff-rate quotas for wheat, corn, and rice. Due to China's poorly defined criteria for applicants, unclear procedures for distributing TRQ allocations, and failure to announce quota allocation and reallocation results, traders are unsure of available import opportunities and producers worldwide have reduced market access opportunities. Consultations took place in February 2017. A WTO panel was established to hear the case at the United States' request in September 2017, and 17 other WTO members joined as third parties. Hearings before the panel took place in July and October 2018, and the panel issued its decision in April 2019, ruling that China's administration of tariff-rate quotas for wheat, corn, and rice was WTO-inconsistent. The United States and China subsequently agreed that the reasonable period of time for China to come into compliance with WTO rules ends on February 29, 2020. In September 2016, the United States initiated another agriculture-related case against China, challenging excessive government support for China's production of wheat, corn, and rice. Like other WTO members, China committed to limit its support for producers of agricultural commodities. China's market price support programs for these agricultural commodities appear to provide support far exceeding the agreed levels. This excessive support creates price distortions and skews the playing field against U.S. farmers. In October 2016, consultations took place. In January 2017, a WTO panel was established to hear the case. Hearings before the panel took place in January and April 2018, and the panel issued its decision in February 2019, ruling that China's domestic support for wheat and rice was WTO-inconsistent. China subsequently agreed to come into compliance with the panel's recommendations by March 31, 2020. In a WTO case initiated in September 2010, the United States challenged China's restrictions on foreign suppliers of electronic payment services. Suppliers like the major U.S. credit card companies provide these services in connection with the operation of electronic networks that process payment transactions involving credit, debit, prepaid, and other payment cards. China's regulatory regime places severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of electronic payment services. Among other things, China prohibits foreign suppliers from handling the typical payment card transaction in China, in which a Chinese consumer is billed and makes payment in China's domestic currency, known as the renminbi (RMB). Instead, China has created a national champion, allowing only one domestic entity, China Union Pay, to supply these services. Consultations were held in October 2010. A WTO panel was established to hear this case at the United States' request in March 2011, and six other WTO members joined the case as third parties. Hearings before the panel took place in October and December 2011, and the panel issued its decision in July 2012. The panel ruled that China's commitments under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) required China to allow foreign suppliers to provide electronic payment services for payment card transactions denominated in RMB through commercial presence in China on non-discriminatory terms. China decided not to appeal the panel's decision and subsequently agreed to come into compliance with the WTO's rulings by July 2013. To date, however, China has failed to come into compliance. In October 2014, China's State Council announced that China would be opening its market to foreign suppliers of electronic payment services, but it delayed the issuance of a formal decision. In April 2015, the State Council finally issued the formal decision setting forth the terms on which China would be opening its market to foreign suppliers of electronic payment services. In August 2015, the regulator, PBOC, issued draft licensing regulations, but it did not issue those regulations in final form until June 2016, during the S&ED meeting. PBOC followed up with the issuance of additional guidance for potential applicants in October 2016 and June 2017. Currently, as of January 2020, over six years after China had promised to comply with the WTO's rulings, no U.S. supplier of electronic payment services has been able to secure the license needed to operate in China's market due largely to delays caused by PBOC. Indeed, at times, PBOC refused even to accept applications to begin preparatory work from U.S. suppliers, the first of two required steps in the licensing process. In the U.S.-China Phase One agreement, China committed to ensure that PBOC operates an improved and timely licensing process for U.S. suppliers of electronic payment services so as to facilitate their access to China's market. The United States will closely monitor PBOC's licensing process going forward. Another WTO case active in 2018 involved U.S. challenges to market access restrictions maintained by China that restricted the importation and distribution of copyright-intensive products such as books, newspapers, journals, theatrical films, DVDs, and music. In this case, hearings before a WTO panel took place in 2008, and the panel issued its decision in August 2009, ruling in favor of the United States on every significant claim in the case. China appealed the panel's decision in September 2009. The WTO's Appellate Body rejected China's appeal on all counts in December 2009. China agreed to come into compliance with the WTO's rulings by March 2011. China subsequently issued several revised measures, and repealed other measures, relating to the market access restrictions on books, newspapers, journals, DVDs, and music. As China acknowledged, however, it did not issue any measures addressing theatrical films. Instead, China proposed bilateral discussions with the United States in order to seek an alternative solution. After months of negotiations, which included discussions between the two sides' Vice Presidents, the United States and China reached agreement in February 2012 on an MOU providing for substantial increases in the number of foreign films imported and distributed in China each year, substantial additional revenue for foreign film producers and the opening up of film distribution opportunities for imported films. To date, however, China has not yet fully implemented its MOU commitments, including with regard to critical commitments to open up film distribution opportunities for imported revenuesharing films. In addition, U.S. industry reports that China has been imposing an informal quota on the total number of U.S. revenue-sharing films and flatfee films that can be imported each year, which, if true, would undermine the terms of the MOU. As a result, the United States has pressed China for full implementation of the MOU. The MOU provided that it would be reviewed in calendar year 2017 in order for the two sides to discuss issues of concern, including additional compensation for the U.S. side. At the November 2016 JCCT meeting, China agreed to begin discussing an updated MOU promptly in 2017. China further promised that those discussions will seek to increase the number of revenue-sharing films to be imported each year and the share of gross box office receipts received by U.S. enterprises as well as seek to address outstanding U.S. concerns relating to other policies and practices that may impede the U.S. film industry's access to China's market, such as importation rights, the number of distributors of imported films, and the independence of distributors, among other issues. In 2017, in accordance with the terms of the MOU, the two sides began discussions regarding the provision of further meaningful compensation to the United States in an updated MOU. These discussions continued until March 2018, when China embarked on a major government reorganization that involved significant changes for China's Film Bureau. Discussions resumed in 2019 as part of the broader U.S.-China trade negotiations that began following the summit meeting between President Trump and President Xi in Buenos Aires on December 1, 2018. To date, no agreement has been reached on the further meaningful compensation that China owes to the United States. Going forward, the United States will continue pressing China to fulfill its obligations.