2018 USTR Report to Congress on China's WTO Compliance

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This report is divided into two parts. Part 1 provides the Administration's assessment of China's WTO membership, the unique and very serious challenges that China's trade policies and practices pose for the multilateral trading system and the effectiveness of the strategies that have been pursued to address the China problem. Part 2 examines China's trade regime in detail and catalogues the United States' persistent efforts to resolve the many concerns that have arisen.

In Part 1, the report begins with an analysis of China's record of compliance with WTO rules, which is poor. The report then describes China's continued embrace of a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade, despite WTO members' expectations – and China's own representations – that China would transform its economy and pursue the open, market-oriented policies endorsed by the WTO. The report next identifies the substantial costs borne by WTO members as a result of China's problematic trade regime. Part 1 concludes with a discussion of the bilateral and multilateral efforts pursued by the Administration and other WTO members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. This discussion also highlights the need for new and more effective strategies – including taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – to address the problems presented by China's non-market economic system.

Part 2 of this report is a detailed analysis of China's trade regime from a WTO perspective. It identifies and explains numerous policies and practices pursued by China that disadvantage or harm U.S. companies and workers, often severely. Despite persistent efforts by the United States to address these issues, many of them reflect longstanding U.S. concerns, dating back a decade or more. As we catalogued in last year's report, a consistent pattern exists where the United States has raised a particular concern, China has specifically promised to address that concern – and China's promise has not been fulfilled.

A small sampling of bilateral and multilateral commitments unfulfilled by China includes the following examples:

- Despite repeated commitments to refrain from forcible technology transfer from U.S. companies, China continues to do so through market access restrictions, the abuse of administrative processes, licensing regulations, asset purchases, and cyber and physical theft.

- China committed to open the electronic payment services market in 2006. This commitment was confirmed in a 2012 ruling by the WTO's dispute settlement body resulting from a U.S. legal challenge. Today, the reality remains that no foreign electronic payment services companies conduct business in China's domestic market.

- China's use of export and import substitution subsidies has been ubiquitous throughout the past two decades in sectors as diverse as automobiles, textiles, advanced materials, medical products and agriculture, despite explicit prohibitions in the WTO Agreement.

- China has repeatedly committed to review applications of agricultural biotechnology products in a timely, ongoing and science-based manner. However, the Chinese regulatory authorities continue to review applications slowly and without scientific rationale, while Chinese companies continue to build up their own capabilities in the area of agricultural biotechnology.

- China has repeatedly deployed illegal export restraints, such as export quotas, export licensing, minimum export prices, export duties and other restrictions, on scores of raw material inputs, as determined in multiple WTO cases brought by the United States and other WTO members. China has used these illegal export restraints to provide substantial cost advantages to a wide range of downstream producers in China at the expense of foreign producers, while creating pressure on foreign producers to move their operations, technologies and jobs to China.

Any review of China's trade regime also shows that China's regulatory system is so opaque that it is often difficult for U.S. companies – or even the U.S. government – to fully understand China's legal requirements in a particular area of the economy. This problem is exacerbated by China's extremely poor record of adhering to its transparency obligations as a WTO member. These shortcomings create their own trade barriers and undermine the competiveness of China's trading partners.

To address the unique and very serious challenges presented by China's trade regime, the Administration is pursuing the following approach:

The United States will defend U.S. companies and workers from China's unfair trading practices and will seek to restore balance to the trade relationship between the United States and China. As part of these efforts, the United States will take all appropriate actions to ensure that the costs of China's non-market economic system are borne by China, not by the United States. The United States also will continue to encourage China to make fundamental structural changes to its approach to the economy and trade consistent with the open, market-oriented approach pursued by other WTO members, which is rooted in the principles of non-discrimination, market access, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. As China should recognize, these changes will do more than simply ease the growing trade tensions with its trading partners. These changes will also benefit China, by placing its economy on a more sustainable path, and will contribute to the growth of the U.S. economy and the global economy.

At its core, this approach is based on the following assessment: (1) WTO membership comes with expectations that an acceding member not only will strictly adhere to WTO rules, but also will support and pursue open, market-oriented policies; (2) China has failed to comply with these expectations; (3) in recent years, China has moved further away from open, market-oriented policies and has more fully embraced a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade; and (4) China's market-distorting policies and practices harm and disadvantage its fellow WTO members, even as China reaps enormous benefits from its WTO membership.

The United States' approach to China is more aggressive than in the past. Out of necessity, the United States is now using all available tools – including domestic trade remedies, bilateral negotiations, WTO litigation and strategic engagement with like-minded trading partners – to respond to the unique and very serious challenges presented by China. But the goal for the United States remains the same. The United States seeks a trade relationship with China that is fair, reciprocal and balanced.


PART 1
U.S. Assessment of China's WTO Membership


OVERVIEW

The founding members of the WTO expressly embraced and endorsed the pursuit of open, market-oriented policies rooted in the principles of non-discrimination, market access, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. China voluntarily sought to join the membership of the WTO. Over the course of many years, China made representations that it was committed to increasing the market-orientation of its economy and trading system, reforming state-owned enterprises so that they operate independently and in accordance with market principles and introducing a pricing system that reflects supply and demand. When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it voluntarily agreed to embrace the WTO's open-market-oriented approach and embed it in its trading system and institutions. Through China's commitments and representations, WTO members understood that China intended to dismantle existing state-led, mercantilist policies and practices, and they expected China to continue on its then-existing path of economic reform and successfully complete a transformation to a market-oriented economy and trade regime.

This did not happen. China became a WTO Member but did not internalize the open-market norms of the WTO community. China retains its non-market economic structure and its state-led, mercantilist approach to trade, to the detriment of its trading partners. At the same time, China has used the benefits of WTO membership – including its guarantee of open, non-discriminatory access to the markets of other WTO Members – to become the WTO's largest trader, while resisting calls for further liberalization of its trade regime by claiming to be a "developing" country.

There are tangible costs associated with China's substantial presence in the multilateral trading system. For example, as this report sets forth in detail, China's non-market economic system and the industrial policies that flow from it have systematically distorted critical sectors of the global economy such as steel and aluminum, devastating markets in the United States and other industrialized countries. In addition, China's industrial policies are increasingly responsible for displacing companies in new, emerging sectors of the global economy, as the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party powerfully intervene on behalf of China's domestic industries. Companies in economies disciplined by the market cannot effectively compete with both Chinese companies and the Chinese state. At the same time, China continues to block valuable sectors of its economy from foreign competition.

Last year, we reported that the United States had erred in supporting China's entry into the WTO on terms that have proven to be ineffective in securing China's embrace of an open, market-oriented approach to the economy and trade. The events of the past year have provided no reason to change this analysis. Indeed, it seems increasingly clear that China's actions have done severe harm to other WTO members and the multilateral trading system, which was never designed to deal with a non-market economy of China's size.

Faced with these challenges, the United States is committed to the defense of U.S. companies and workers from China's unfair trading practices and to the restoration of balance to the trade relationship between the United States and China. As part of these efforts, the United States will take all appropriate actions to ensure that the costs of China's non-market economic system are borne by China, not by the United States. The United States will also continue to encourage China to make fundamental structural changes to its approach to the economy and trade consistent with the open, market-oriented approach pursued by other WTO members, which is rooted in the principles of non-discrimination, market access, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. As China should recognize, these changes will do more than simply ease the growing trade tensions with its trading partners. These changes will also benefit China, by placing its economy on a more sustainable path, and will contribute to the growth of the U.S. economy and the global economy.

In the past year, the United States has taken decisive action under domestic law to address a particularly serious manifestation of China's state-led, mercantilist trade regime. At the direction of President Trump, under the authority of Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, USTR conducted a wide-ranging investigation into China's forcible transfer of technology. USTR concluded that China was responsible for: (1) pressuring the transfer of technology through the abuse of administrative processes and other means; (2) using discriminatory regulations to force non-market licensing outcomes for U.S. businesses; (3) leveraging state capital to acquire U.S. high-technology assets for transfer to Chinese companies in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives; and (4) obtaining U.S. intellectual property and sensitive business information through cyber theft for the commercial benefit of Chinese industry.

In response, the United States: (1) imposed duties on $250 billion dollars' worth of Chinese imports; and (2) initiated dispute settlement at the WTO challenging China's discriminatory technology licensing regulations. The United States also began implementing the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 (FIRRMA) to protect critical American technology and intellectual property from potentially harmful foreign acquisitions. In addition, the United States brought indictments against individuals engaging in cyber and physical theft of trade secrets for or on behalf of China.

Separately, the United States continues to defend U.S. trade remedy laws from attack by China in the WTO. These laws are critical to ensure that the costs associated with China's non-market policies and practices are not borne by U.S. companies and workers. The United States is working closely with the European Union (EU) to oppose China's unfounded WTO challenge against the use of non-market economy methodologies in antidumping proceedings.

The United States also seeks to work with trading partners that share our vision to take effective action to address market-distorting practices in China. We urge other WTO members to join us in this critical effort. Currently, the United States is working with the EU and Japan as part of a new high-level trilateral partnership to address directly the systemic distortions caused by China's non-market economic system. This partnership coordinates joint actions and examines potential rules where existing rules are ineffective.

As a result of these actions, it appears that China may have begun to take our concerns more seriously. During a meeting in Buenos Aries, Argentina, in December 2018, China's President Xi agreed with President Trump to begin negotiations on structural changes in China with respect to forced technology transfer, intellectual property protection, non-tariff barriers, cyber intrusions and cyber theft, services and agriculture.

One final point should be emphasized. As noted above, the market-based reforms that we seek in China will help not only the United States and China's other trading partners, but also China itself. Chinese businesses and entrepreneurs will benefit from reforms that encourage true market competition. Chinese innovators will benefit from reforms that protect intellectual property. Chinese consumers will benefit from reforms that allow improved access to high quality U.S. goods and services. Chinese workers will benefit from reforms that can lead to improved economic conditions and higher living standards, both in China and elsewhere. In short, by promoting market-based reforms the U.S. government hopes to build a stronger global economy for everyone's benefit.

In the sections that follow, we make the following assessments as we more closely analyze China's record as a WTO member: (1) WTO membership comes with expectations that an acceding member not only will strictly adhere to WTO rules, but also will support and pursue open, market-oriented policies; (2) China has failed to comply with these expectations; (3) in recent years, China has moved further away from open, market-oriented policies and has more fully embraced a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade; and (4) China's market-distorting policies and practices harm and disadvantage its fellow WTO members, even as China reaps enormous benefits from its WTO membership. We then discuss the bilateral and multilateral strategies pursued by the Administration and other WTO members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. This discussion also highlights the need for new and more effective strategies – including taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – to address the problems presented by China's non-market economic system.


EXPECTATIONS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP

For all WTO members, the expectations of WTO membership are clearly set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, WTO members expressly affirmed their view that the establishment of the WTO ushers in a "new era of global economic cooperation" that "reflect[s] the widespread desire to operate in a fairer and more open multilateral trading system." WTO members further made clear their determination that their economies would participate in the international trading system based on both "open, market-oriented policies and the commitments set out in the Uruguay Round Agreements and Decisions." (Emphasis added.)

As this language makes clear, it clearly was not contemplated that any WTO member would reject market-based policies in favor of a state-led trade regime. It also was not contemplated that any WTO member would pursue mercantilist outcomes instead of policies promoting a fairer and more open multilateral trading system. Rather, it was expected that each WTO member would pursue open, market-oriented policies designed to achieve more efficient outcomes. The pursuit of open, market-oriented policies means not only strictly adhering to the agreed rules but also observing in good faith the fundamental principles that run throughout the many WTO agreements, which include non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency.

In the case of China, its protocol of accession to the WTO sets out China's obligations under the WTO agreements as well as numerous additional China-specific commitments made necessary because of China's incomplete transition to a market economy. China's protocol also reflects an understanding that China would need to, and had agreed to, transform its approach to the economy and trade. China itself acknowledged "the evolving nature of its economy," and it confirmed that at the time of China's accession to the WTO "a socialist market economy system was applied" in China. Similarly, WTO members highlighted that "China was continuing the process of transition towards a full market economy." WTO members also noted, for example, that "the special features of China's economy, in its present state of reform, still created the potential for a certain level of trade-distorting subsidization."

For these reasons, it was agreed that special safeguard-like provisions would be included among the terms of China's protocol of accession as protective measures while China completed its transformation into a market economy. For example, China's protocol of accession included a China-specific safeguard mechanism, special antidumping rules and special methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits. It also created a unique, 10-year review mechanism designed to monitor China's progress in implementing its many WTO commitments and to secure updated information on the use of industrial plans by China.

Unfortunately, China has a poor record when it comes to complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based. Too often, China flouts the rules to achieve industrial policy objectives. In addition, and of more serious concern to the United States and other WTO members, China has not made sufficient progress in transitioning toward a market economy. China continues to embrace a state-led, non-market and mercantilist approach to the economy and trade. This approach results in sophisticated and expansive policies and practices that often evade WTO disciplines and cause serious harm to markets, industries and workers in the United States and other WTO Members.


CHINA'S RECORD OF COMPLIANCE WITH WTO RULES

While China appeared to revise numerous laws and regulations to bring them into conformity with its WTO obligations in the first few years after its WTO accession, China's trade regime nevertheless generated many WTO compliance concerns. Too often, WTO members have had to resort to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to change problematic Chinese policies and practices. The United States, for example, has brought 23 challenges at the WTO against China covering a wide range of important policies and practices. Among other matters, these cases have taken on the following WTO-inconsistent activities pursued by China: (1) local content requirements in the automobile sector; (2) discriminatory taxes in the integrated circuit sector; (3) hundreds of prohibited subsidies in a wide range of manufacturing sectors; (4) inadequate intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement in the copyright area; (5) significant market access barriers in copyright-intensive industries; (6) severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of financial information services; (7) export restraints on numerous raw materials; (8) a denial of market access for foreign suppliers of electronic payment services; (9) repeated abusive use of trade remedies; (10) excessive domestic support for key agricultural commodities; (11) the opaque and protectionist administration of tariff-rate quotas for key agricultural commodities; and (12) discriminatory regulations on technology licensing.

Even though the United States has routinely prevailed in these WTO disputes, they take years to litigate, consume significant resources and often require further efforts when China resists complying with panel or Appellate Body rulings.

One conspicuous ongoing example of non-compliance involves electronic payment services. China still blocks major U.S. suppliers such as Visa and MasterCard from its market despite the fact that (1) it committed to open its market to foreign suppliers by 2006 and (2) a WTO dispute settlement panel confirmed this commitment in a case brought by the United States. As has become clear, China's industrial policy objective is to protect its national champion, China Union Pay, from competition in China so that it can use the revenues from a captive domestic market to fund its own global expansion. This non-market behavior, which is ongoing, harms U.S. companies and their workers.

China has been a particularly bad actor when it comes to trade remedies. While the use of trade remedies in a manner consistent with WTO rules is an important tool for protecting domestic industries from unfair and injurious trade practices, China has made a practice of launching antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) investigations that appear designed to discourage its trading partners from the legitimate exercise of their rights under WTO rules. This type of retaliatory conduct is not typical of WTO members, nor is it a legitimate basis for seeking AD and CVD relief. Moreover, when China has pursued AD and CVD investigations under these circumstances, it appears that its regulatory authorities have tended to move forward with the imposition of duties regardless of the strength of the underlying legal claims and evidence. The United States' three successful WTO cases challenging the duties imposed by China on imports of U.S. grain-oriented electrical steel (GOES), U.S. chicken broiler products and U.S. automobiles offer telling examples of this problem. Indeed, China's poor behavior does not always stop after an adverse WTO ruling. In two of the three WTO cases brought by the United States on trade remedies, China did not comply with the WTO's rulings, and the United States was forced to bring Article 21.5 compliance proceedings to secure China's compliance.

China's retaliatory use of trade remedies highlights another unique issue that WTO members face when dealing with China – the threat of reprisal. It is no secret that foreign companies are hesitant to speak publicly, or to be perceived as working with their governments to challenge China's trade policies or practices, because they fear retaliation from the Chinese state. A study by one U.S. industry association noted that foreign companies confidentially have reported receiving explicit or implicit threats from Chinese government officials – typically made orally rather than in writing – about possible retaliatory actions that could have severe repercussions for a company's business prospects in China. At the same time, it also is no secret that China threatens more vulnerable WTO members to dissuade them from speaking publicly against China.

A further persistent problem is China's inadequate regulatory transparency. China disregards many of its WTO transparency obligations, which places its trading partners at a disadvantage and often serves as a cloak for China to conceal unfair trade policies and practices from scrutiny.

For example, for years, China failed to notify its fellow WTO members of any sub-central government subsidies, despite the fact that most subsidies in China emanate from provincial and local governments. In fact, it took China 15 years before it notified its first sub-central government subsidy, and even then its notification was confined largely to subsidies that China had terminated after the United States had challenged them in a WTO case. The magnitude and significance of this problem is illustrated by the five WTO cases that the United States has brought challenging prohibited subsidies maintained by China. While those cases involved hundreds of subsidies, most of the subsidies were provided by sub-central governments. The United States was able to bring those cases only because of its own extensive investigatory efforts to uncover China's opaque subsidization practices. Of course, most other WTO members lack the resources to conduct the same types of investigations.

Today, China continues to shield massive sub-central government subsidies from the scrutiny of WTO members. Together with other non-market practices, these subsidies contribute to the serious excess capacity problems that plague industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fishing and devastate global markets and foreign competitors. Industrial plans such as Made in China 2025, which reportedly targets 10 advanced manufacturing sectors in China with hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies, inevitably will create a new wave of industries with severe excess capacity, to the detriment of China's trading partners.

China also conceals information about state trading enterprises. Since China's WTO accession in 2001, the United States and other WTO members repeatedly have sought information from China on the pricing and purchasing practices of state trading enterprises, principally through the transitional reviews at the WTO. However, China only provided general information, which did not allow a meaningful assessment of China's compliance efforts. China also did not make regular notifications of its state trading enterprises, as required by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994). China submitted its first notification in 2003 and then stopped. China did not submit another notification until 2015, and it did so only because the United States had submitted a counter notification identifying 44 state trading enterprises not previously notified by China. Even so, China's 2015 notification did not include much of the detailed information envisioned by the GATT 1994's requirement.

In addition, China often frustrates the intended functioning of WTO committees and councils and other WTO bodies. These WTO bodies should provide a forum for monitoring a member's compliance with its WTO obligations and for discussing and resolving specific concerns that may arise. However, China does not have a record of taking this type of work seriously, and it frequently undercuts the utility of these consultative bodies.

One longstanding example involves the Transitional Review Mechanism, a special, China-specific mechanism established by China's protocol of accession. For the first ten years after China's accession, this mechanism called for review meetings before each of 16 WTO committees and councils. Throughout the 10-year life of this mechanism and the 16 review meetings that took place each year, China refused to respond to WTO members' written questions in writing in advance of relevant review meetings and confined its participation to oral statements, contrary to the agreed procedures. This behavior made it difficult for concerned members to ask probing follow-up questions and fully understand the policies and practices under review.

Similarly, in the Subsidies Committee, not only does China have a poor record of adhering to its notification obligations, but it also fails to cooperate when other members make requests for information pursuant to the rules in the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (Subsidies Agreement). For example, China repeatedly has failed to provide substantive answers to the United States' requests for information about China's subsidy practices. In addition, when the United States itself has submitted information identifying subsidies that China apparently has not reported, China regularly does not respond with any additional substantive information, contrary to the procedures envisioned by Subsidies Agreement rules.

Remarkably, China has still not completed its update to its Harmonized System (HS) 2002 tariff schedule. Although WTO members approved a final HS 2002 tariff schedule for China in March 2017 after 12 years of negotiation, China continues to withhold its schedule for certification, claiming that its domestic approval process, which so far has lasted 18 months, is not yet completed. China has not even begun the process of certifying its HS 2007, HS 2012 and HS 2017 tariff schedules. Accordingly, WTO members today do not have accurate, current information on all of China's tariff schedules and tariff bindings.

When China does take the initiative to engage in WTO bodies, it typically is not seeking to find ways to further liberalize trade. Too often, China is seeking to move in the opposite direction. In the WTO's Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Council), for example, China has pursued discussion topics or has backed proposed amendments to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) that would weaken the obligations that members took on in the TRIPS Agreement.

For years, the United States has urged China to change the behaviors described above and become a responsible member of the WTO. In the future, the United States will continue this effort. The United States also will continue to use the WTO dispute settlement mechanism as an enforcement tool as appropriate and will continue working through WTO committees and councils and other WTO bodies to seek effective actions to curb problematic Chinese policies and practices.

However, it is unrealistic to believe that actions at the WTO alone would ever be sufficient to force or persuade China to make fundamental changes to its trade regime. The WTO system was designed for countries that are truly committed to market principles – not for an enormous country determined to maintain a state-led, non-market system. No matter how many cases are brought at the WTO, China can always find a way to engage in market-distorting practices. Furthermore, as we discuss below, given the extent to which China has benefited from the current state of affairs, it is not likely to agree to effective new WTO disciplines on its behavior. Given these facts, it seems clear that relying solely on the WTO and its mechanisms to address China's unfair trade practices is a recipe for failure. Accordingly, while the United States will use the WTO where possible – and will continue efforts to encourage other countries to work with us at the WTO – the United States must also take action outside the WTO to encourage China to move in a more open and market-oriented direction.


CHINA'S RECORD IN TERMS OF ITS TRANSITION TO A MARKET ECONOMY

Today, almost two decades after China pledged to support the WTO's multilateral trading system, China has not embraced open, market-oriented policies. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve industrial policy objectives.

China pursues a wide array of continually evolving interventionist policies and practices aimed at limiting market access for imported goods and services and restricting the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China. At the same time, it offers substantial government guidance, resources and regulatory support to Chinese industries. The principal beneficiaries of China's policies and practices are China's state-owned enterprises and numerous other significant domestic companies, sometimes referred to as "national champions," that are attempting to move up the economic value chain.

The benefits that Chinese industry realizes largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their companies and workers. As a result of China's industrial policies, markets all over the world are less efficient than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

This situation has worsened in recent years. While some of the legislative and regulatory changes that China made in the years immediately following its WTO accession offered the potential for China's fuller embrace of market principles, these efforts stalled and stagnated. Since new leaders assumed power in China in 2013, the state's role in the economy – effectuated by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the Chinese Communist Party – has grown. Similarly, the depth and breadth of concerns facing U.S. and other foreign companies doing business in China – or competing with favored Chinese companies markets outside of China – also have increased.

Despite this reality, China repeatedly signals that it is pursuing what it calls "economic reform." For example, in November 2013, at the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, China issued a number of seemingly favorable pronouncements, including calling for making the market "decisive" in allocating resources and reducing Chinese government intervention in the economy. More recently, in May 2018, China reminded WTO members at a General Council meeting that 2018 marks the 40th anniversary of China's self-described "reform and opening up" policy. However, China's use of the term "economic reform" differs from the type of change that a country would be pursuing if it were embracing open, market-oriented principles. For China, "economic reform" appears to mean perfecting the management of the economy by the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party and strengthening the state sector, particularly state-owned enterprises.


China's Non-market Economic System

To fully appreciate the challenges presented by China's non-market economy, it is vital to understand the extent to which – almost two decades after China joined the WTO – the Chinese state still maintains control over economic decision-making in that country. A thorough examination of China's Constitution, relevant directives and pronouncements by China's leadership, legislative and regulatory measures issued by the Chinese government, China's industrial plans and the actions of the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party leaves no doubt that the Chinese state maintains a tight grip on virtually all economic activity.

At its core, the framework of China's economy is set by the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party, which exercise control directly and indirectly over the allocation of resources through instruments such as government ownership and control of key economic actors and innumerable government directives. The government and the Party have constitutional mandates to develop a "socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics." Article 6 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China provides that, "[i]n the primary stage of socialism, the state upholds the basic economic system in which public ownership is dominant and diverse forms of ownership develop side by side . . . ." Article 7 provides that "[t]he state-owned economy, that is, the socialist economy with ownership by the whole people, is the leading force in the national economy. The state ensures the consolidation and development of the state-owned economy." Similarly, the Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party provides: "The Communist Party of China leads the people in developing the socialist market economy. It unwaveringly consolidates and develops the public sector of the economy and unswervingly encourages, supports and guides the development of the non-public sector."

To fulfill these mandates, the government and the Party direct and channel economic actors to meet the state's planning targets. The government and the Party permit market forces to operate only to the extent that they accord with the objectives of national economic and industrial policies. When there is conflict between market outcomes and state objectives, the government and the Party intervene to ensure that the state's objectives prevail.

This past year, China indicated that it has no plans to significantly change its basic approach to the economy. As China explained in the report that it circulated in connection with its July 2018 trade policy review at the WTO, "[w]hile socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era, the basic dimension of the Chinese context – that China is still and will long remain in the primary stage of socialism – has not changed." China added that it is committed to a "socialist market economy" and to improving "the relationship between the government and the market." In China's view, an improved relationship appears to mean that the state plays its role better in managing the economy, not that the state ceases to intervene and allows market forces to determine outcomes.

Aside from the role of the government and the Party in managing the economy, there are also serious concerns over how they exercise influence over the operations and investment decisions of both state-owned enterprises and private companies, including foreign-invested enterprises. This influence appears to be growing, as the Party is increasing its control over key actors in China's economy and not, as hoped, enabling China's transition to a market economy.

China claims that its state-owned enterprises make business decisions independently of the state and based on market principles. However, the government and the Party continue to exercise control over state-owned enterprises. Among other things, they appoint and control key executives through the Chinese Communist Party Organization Department. They also provide state-owned enterprises with preferential access to important inputs (such as land and capital) and other competitive advantages unavailable to non-state-owned companies. State-owned enterprises, in turn, play an outsized role in China's economy. For example, state-owned enterprises outstrip private Chinese companies in terms of their share of total credit, their market dominance in key industries and their share of total market capitalization on China's stock market.

At the 2017 Central Economic Work Conference, a high-level annual meeting on economic policy, China's leaders made clear the importance of state-owned enterprises. They stated that one of six priorities for China's economy in 2018 was to promote stronger, better and bigger state-owned enterprises, and they explained that the means for achieving this priority was to strengthen Party leadership and Party infrastructure in state-owned enterprises.

Indeed, both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies host internal Party committees capable of exercising government and Party influence over their corporate governance and business decisions. This arrangement is actually codified in Chinese law under Article 19 of the Company Law, which applies to both state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies. Recently, moreover, the Party has taken further steps to increase the strength and presence of Party committees within all of these companies. As part of these Party building activities, state-owned enterprises and private Chinese companies are being pressured to amend their articles of association to ensure Party representation on their boards of directors, usually as the Chairman of the Board, and to ensure that important company decisions are made in consultation with Party committees.

Recent reports indicate that the Party also is now looking to influence the managerial and investment decisions of foreign-invested enterprises in China through the insertion of Party committees. The Federation of German Industries stated in its 2019 Policy Paper: "The direct influence of the state or the party in corporate decisions is being expanded through a political upgrading of party cells. These intervene not only in the decision-making processes of state-owned enterprises but also in joint ventures and private enterprises." This warning follows a statement by the Delegations of Germany Industry and Commerce in November 2017 pushing back against attempts by the Party to strengthen its influence in wholly German-owned companies in China. In November 2017, the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China expressed similar concerns. It noted that China's efforts to codify Party influence in joint ventures between Chinese companies and foreign companies significantly changes the joint venture's governance and undermines the authority of the joint venture's board of directors. The Chamber of Commerce added that it is unaware of any legal basis for the insertion of Party committees into joint ventures.

Further reinforcing the Party's influence is the Social Credit System, a new tool endorsed by the Party that the government will be using to monitor, rate and condition not only the conduct of all individuals in China, but also all domestic and foreign companies in China. This system is expected to become fully operational in 2020. While details are still emerging, it appears that the government will use the Social Credit System, among other things, to ensure that economic actors follow industrial plans.

Separate from these various mechanisms used to control company behavior, the government and the Party continue to control or otherwise influence the prices of key factors of production. The result is that the means of production in China are not sufficiently allocated or priced according to market principles.

For example, all land in China is property of the state, as either state-owned urban land or collectively owned rural land. Because the state controls rural land acquisition and monopolizes the distribution of urban land-use rights, the state remains the final arbiter of who uses the land and for what purpose. Land-use rights holders, in turn, face limits with respect to the tenure and the scope of use. The result of these dynamics is an inefficient land market in which large swathes of land are misallocated either to small farm plots or to underutilized urban infrastructure.

In addition, there are significant institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management. China denies workers the right of association and the right to organize and collectively bargain. China prohibits the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, and workers do not have the legal right to strike, which is an important lever in collective action and negotiation with management over wages in market economies. Labor unions in China are under the control and direction of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU), a government-affiliated and Party organ. While China has implemented legislation such as the Labor Contract Law and the Labor Dispute Law that appears to provide employees with a cause of action to challenge particular aspects of an employee's labor contract, these laws in reality do not advance the fundamental rights of freedom of association and collective bargaining. In addition, government restrictions on labor mobility continue to inhibit and guide labor flows, causing distortions on the supply side of the labor market.

The state also exerts a high degree of control over energy and other input prices. In the electricity sector, for example, the government owns the largest power generation and grid operating companies, controls downstream prices and employs differential pricing as a policy tool to achieve capacity shedding and other industrial policy objectives.

The influence of the government and the Party is particularly acute in the financial sector. Five large commercial banks that are majority state-owned operate large branch networks on a nationwide basis and account for nearly half of total bank assets. There are also three large state-owned policy banks, as well as scores of city commercial banks and credit unions under local government control. In addition to the ownership of these banks by the government, the state exercises other forms of influence over banking decisions. The Party, through its Organization Department, appoints executives in state-owned banks and other state-owned financial institutions. China's central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), also meets frequently with large banks in China to ensure that their lending decisions align with PBOC and government objectives. In addition, the Law on Commercial Banks provides that "commercial banks are to conduct their business of lending in accordance with the needs of national economic and social development and under the guidance of the industrial policies of the state."

Similarly, China's legal system continues to function as an instrument by which the government and the Party can secure discrete economic outcomes, channel broader economic policy and pursue industrial policy objectives. Key legal institutions, such as the courts, are structured to respond to the Party's direction, both broadly and on a case-specific basis. As a general matter, to the extent that companies and individuals seek to act independently of government or Party direction, the legal system does not provide a venue for them to achieve these objectives on a systemic or consistent basis. In addition, companies and individuals continue to face challenges in obtaining impartial outcomes, either because of local protectionism or corruption.

The larger issue of China's restrictions on the freedom of information also impacts China's economic system. For example, while China's Internet firewall and the Party's regular censorship of audio-visual and print media have many negative effects outside China's economic system, they also create distortions in China's economy, and these distortions affect the ability of foreign companies to operate and compete effectively in China's market.

In recent years, China also has been exporting its non-market economic model to other countries through its Belt and Road Initiative. As is now well known, China invokes this initiative and offers to build large infrastructure projects in countries throughout Asia and other parts of the world, especially in strategically located or developing countries. China claims that the Belt and Road Initiative is open to all, but virtually all projects are financed by Chinese banks, run by Chinese state-owned enterprises and built by Chinese workers. The Belt and Road Initiative is especially important to the Chinese Communist Party, which has incorporated the Belt and Road Initiative into its Constitution and has called for using this initiative to develop relations with surrounding countries through discussion, collaboration and unity. However, Belt and Road Initiative projects are often opaque, one-sided and divisive. These projects generally ignore market principles and fail to adhere to internationally accepted best practices in financing, infrastructure development and government procurement. Too often, these projects also create unsustainable debt burdens for the recipient countries.


China's State-led, Mercantilist Approach to Trade

In China's economic framework, state planning through industrial policies conveys the state's instructions regarding sector-specific economic and trade objectives. While some sectors are deemed strategic and fundamental and therefore receive more attention and resources, no sector of the economy escapes the oversight of the government and the Party.

China is currently in its 13th five-year planning cycle, a hallmark of a planned economy that has become more, not less, salient over the past 18 years of China's WTO membership. China retains formal mechanisms of plan formulation, tasking and review, and over the years it has expanded the scope and specificity of its industrial plans, which span all sectors of China's economy. Various institutions participate in plan formulation and execution, including central government bodies with legislative and regulatory authority, thousands of local government authorities, various organs of the Party and key Chinese companies.

As one example, a number of official publications of the government and the Party set out China's ambitious technology-related industrial policies. The industrial policies reflect a top-down, state-directed approach to technology development, and are founded on concepts such as "indigenous innovation" and "re-innovation" of foreign technologies. The government and the Party regard technology development as integral to the economic development of Chinese industry and seek to attain its domestic dominance and global leadership in a wide range of technologies. In pursuit of these overarching objectives, China has issued a large number of industrial policies, including, among many others, the National Medium- and Long-Term Science and Technology Development Plan Outline (2006-2020) in 2005, the Decision on Accelerating and Cultivating the Development of Strategic Emerging Industries in 2010 and the Made in China 2025 industrial plan, launched in 2015.

Increasingly, China also has used new types of state-controlled financial institutions, such as the National Integrated Circuit Fund, to implement its industrial policies. This fund for the integrated circuit industry was established under the guidance of two government ministries and funded by several prominent state-owned enterprises and state-owned financial institutions. The objectives are to achieve breakthroughs in cutting-edge core technologies and to establish "secure and controllable" information technology systems. Unfortunately, "secure and controllable" is a euphemism used for excluding foreign products and services from many sectors of China's economy.

When compared to the industrial policies of other WTO members, China's industrial policies are fundamentally different. In several significant ways, China's industrial policies go well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries.

First, adherence to the objectives of China's industrial policies is effectively mandatory. Chinese companies have little discretion to ignore them, even when market forces would dictate different commercial behavior.

Second, the financial support that the state provides to domestic industries in support of China's industrial policies is significantly larger than in other countries, and it is not limited to funding for research and development. The state also provides massive, market-distorting financial support to the ongoing operations of China's domestic industries. This support often leads to severe excess capacity in China – followed by China's widespread dumping of the inevitable excess production into the markets of other WTO members. This assault on global markets can cause serious harm to other WTO members' industries and workers. The WTO does not provide effective mechanisms for addressing this problem.

Third, China actively seeks to help its domestic producers through myriad additional policies and practices that impede, disadvantage and harm the foreign competition and skew the playing field against imported goods and services and foreign manufacturers and services suppliers. For example:

- China seeks to manage the export of many primary, intermediate and downstream products by strategically raising or lowering the value-added tax (VAT) rebate available upon export, typically with the objective of making large quantities of primary and intermediate products in a particular sector available domestically at lower prices than in the rest of the world. This practice gives China's downstream producers using these inputs a significant competitive advantage over foreign producers.

- China employs extensive and varied market access prohibitions and limitations designed to protect domestic manufacturers and services suppliers from competition in many sectors of China's market.

- China employs investment restrictions designed to protect domestic manufacturers and services suppliers from foreign competitors and to encourage technology transfer.

- China imposes unique national standards strategically, both to promote the dominance of China's market by Chinese companies and to serve the interests of Chinese companies seeking to compete globally.

- China pursues forced technology transfer through joint venture requirements and administrative approval processes.

- State-sponsored, cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property, trade secrets and know-how is conducted for the commercial benefit of Chinese companies.

- China continues to insist upon a large role for state-owned enterprises, and accords them numerous competitive preferences, to the detriment of foreign companies, both in China's market and abroad.

- Chinese government officials routinely intervene on an ad hoc basis when market-based outcomes conflict with China's industrial policy objectives.

- China conditions subsidies, regulatory preferences and government procurement preferences on the localization of technology in China.

- China uses competition law enforcement to achieve industrial policy objectives.

- China uses cybersecurity as a pretext to discriminate against foreign information communications technology (ICT) products and services and to promote the substitution of domestic ICT products and services in sectors throughout the Chinese economy.

- As described above, China inserts Party committees into Chinese companies and, increasingly, foreign companies operating in China, with the objective of ensuring that important company decisions are made in accordance with government policy objectives.

- The Party has effective authority to determine the result of legal challenges in China's courts as necessary in order to achieve the state's industrial policy objectives.

- China's regulatory regime in many respects remains opaque, which enables the government to pursue other problematic policies and practices that are difficult to uncover.

When combined with China's large size and large share of global trade, these policies and practices transform China into a unique and pressing problem for the WTO and the multilateral trading system.

Meanwhile, new mechanisms to maintain and enhance the state's control over the economy continue to emerge. For example:

- China is beginning to deploy cross-border data restrictions and data localization requirements that will severely limit how foreign companies can do business in China.

- As described above, China is developing its new Social Credit System, which apparently will be used to monitor, rate and condition the conduct of all companies in China, including foreign companies, and to ensure that all companies operate in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives.


COSTS OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC SYSTEM TO WTO MEMBERS

There are many ways in which China's approach to the economy and trade harms its trading partners and their industries and workers. Some of these examples are described in more detail below.


Forced Technology Transfer

Last year, as part of its Section 301 investigation, USTR issued two detailed factual reports that illustrate how China has pursued unreasonable and discriminatory acts, policies and practices that harm U.S. intellectual property rights, innovation and technology development. The first report was issued in March 2018, and the second report was issued in November 2018.

The March 2018 report highlighted industrial plans like Made in China 2025 and detailed how the Chinese government uses foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal joint venture requirements, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. The report also explained how China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. In addition, the report analyzed how the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese entities to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by state industrial plans. Finally, the report illustrated how the Chinese government has conducted or supported cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, with the targets being intellectual property and sensitive commercial information held by U.S. firms.

In the November 2018 report, USTR reviewed developments over the preceding several months and examined, in particular, whether China had responded constructively to USTR's March 2018 report. The second report found that China had not fundamentally altered the unfair, unreasonable and market-distorting policies and practices that were the subject of the first report.

While these reports focused on the harm caused to U.S. interests, it is not a problem borne solely by the United States. China's unfair acts, policies and practices relating to forced technology transfer also impact other WTO members whose companies have developed or are developing advanced technologies.


Excess Capacity

One significant result of China's non-market economic system is the creation of excess capacity – that is, capacity that would not persist if market forces were operating properly. Excess capacity is a sign that resources are not being allocated in an efficient manner. According to a 2016 report by the European Union Chamber of Commerce, key recurring factors in the creation of excess capacity in China include the protection of local industries, weak enforcement of regulations, price controls for significant inputs and fiscal imbalances that create a perverse incentive to attract excessive investment.

Even though the state's management of the economy largely is responsible for excess capacity in China, the state often uses excess capacity as an excuse for further government control. For example, in 2017, the Chinese government issued guiding measures to reduce severe excess capacity in the steel and coal industries. These measures essentially endorse China's so-called "supply-side structural reform" initiative as the solution – even though that initiative calls for further state intervention and financial support, rather than a fuller embrace of market-based principles. Unsurprisingly, these measures have proven to be ineffective.

Excess capacity in China harms U.S. interests and the interests of other WTO members in numerous ways. First, it leads to injury in the markets of China's trading partners due to direct exports of excess production from China. Many WTO members, including Canada, Australia, India and the EU, have responded to the trade-distortive effects of China's excess capacity by imposing trade remedies such as antidumping and countervailing duties in response to petitions from their domestic industries. Second, excess capacity in China hurts the global economy because lower global prices and a glut of supply make it difficult for even the most competitive producers outside China to remain viable. For example, China's excess capacity in solar panels was a key reason why U.S. imports of solar cells and modules from China increased by 500 percent from 2012 to 2016, while prices for solar cells and modules fell by 60 percent. Conditions deteriorated to a point where most U.S. producers ceased domestic production, moved their facilities to other countries or declared bankruptcy. By 2017, the U.S. solar manufacturing industry had almost disappeared, with 25 companies closing since 2012. Similar effects were felt in the EU, which also used to be a world leader in the solar sector. These facts led the United States to impose safeguard measures on imports of solar cells and modules in early 2018.

China today is the primary cause of excess capacity in a number of key sectors of the global economy. For example, China's large increases in steel capacity since it joined the WTO in 2001 have led to extraordinary increases in steel production. China's steel capacity rose from 160 million metric tons (MT) in 2001 to 1,048 million MT in 2017. Correspondingly, China's annual steel production rose from 151 million MT in 2001 to 832 million MT in 2017, by far the largest in the world. China's steel industry now accounts for about 50 percent of global steel capacity and global steel production. Because China had created a global crisis in steel, the United States was forced to adopt a global response, in the form of tariffs under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.

In its Guiding Opinions on Resolving the Conflict of Serious Overcapacity, issued in 2013, China itself acknowledged excess capacity in several industries, including steel, cement, electrolytic aluminum, flat glass and shipbuilding. Examples of numerous other excess capacity industries are discussed in a 2016 study issued by the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China entitled "Overcapacity in China: An Impediment to the Party's Reform Agenda." Remarkably, however, no practical steps were taken to address this problem until the United States acted to insulate critical industries like steel and aluminum from the harmful effects of global oversupply.

Looking ahead, some of the Chinese industries most likely to inflict the disastrous consequences of severe excess capacity on the world in the future can be found in the Made in China 2025 industrial plan. Through that industrial plan, the Chinese government is seeking to create dominant companies in 10 advanced manufacturing sectors, which include advanced information technology, robotics and automated machine tools, aircraft and aircraft components, maritime vessels and marine engineering equipment, advanced rail equipment, new energy vehicles, electrical generation and transmission equipment, agricultural machinery, new materials and pharmaceuticals and medical devices. By some estimates, the Chinese government is making available more than $500 billion of financial support to these sectors, both through Made in China 2025 and related industrial plans. Based on the recent history of the steel and aluminum industries, China's non-market distortions in these newer sectors will likely result in oversupply, leading to loss of jobs and production in market economies.


Distorted Markets

Even in the absence of forced technology transfer or severe excess capacity, China's non-market economic system causes serious harm to industries and workers in the United States and other WTO members. This harm occurs because Chinese companies use the artificial competitive advantages provided to them by the interventionist policies and practices of the Chinese state to undersell their foreign competition.

The extent of this harm to foreign manufacturers is reflected in the very large number of antidumping and countervailing duty investigations that have been initiated against China by the investigating authorities of WTO members. Since China joined the WTO in 2001, it has been the number one target of WTO members' investigating authorities for both antidumping and countervailing duty investigations. Since 2001, WTO members have initiated 1,268 antidumping investigations of exports from China. No other country has faced even one third as many antidumping investigations during that time.

One key reason why exports from China are subject so often to investigations by other WTO members' antidumping authorities is China's economic system, which is fundamentally different from the open, market-oriented economic systems found in other WTO members. When a sectoral industrial plan directs China's domestic companies to produce certain types of products or products in certain quantities or allocates billions of dollars of financial support to manufacture advanced, new products, price distortions are inevitable.

The relationships that a government tolerates among domestic businesses also can create market distortions. For example, when a government tolerates conduct that leads to widespread, competition-inhibiting behavior or cross-subsidization among companies in a domestic industry (as in Chinese industries dominated by state-owned enterprises), it can provide the domestic companies with unfair advantages over their foreign counterparts.


BENEFITS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP TO CHINA

China has not transformed its economic system to embrace open, market-oriented principles, nor has it abandoned its state-led, mercantilist trade regime in favor of a cooperative approach that promotes a multilateral trading system that is more fair and more open. Nevertheless, China has used WTO membership to develop rapidly.

In 2001, when China acceded to the WTO, China's economy was the sixth largest in the world. Today, China's economy is now four times larger than it was in 2001. Overall, China is now the largest goods trader among WTO members, accounting for almost 14 percent of total global exports and almost 11 percent of total global imports in 2017.

In 2001, China was the world's sixth-largest goods exporter. By 2013, it ranked number one, and it currently exports about the same value of goods as all of North America combined. In terms of goods imports, China was the world's sixth largest importer in 2001, and today it is the second largest importer in the world.

In short, there can be no doubt that China has benefited enormously from its WTO membership even though, as shown throughout this report, China has not sought to transform its economic system or its trade regime as had been expected, and it has never fully complied with WTO rules.

Exacerbating this unfortunate situation is the fact that China also has generally refused to take on more responsibilities at the WTO. Instead, China claims that it is a "developing" country, and it uses that claim to justify maintaining policies and practices that protect its domestic industries. However, China's claim of developing country status is disingenuous and inconsistent with the terms of its Protocol of Accession to the WTO.

When China joined the WTO more than 17 years ago, WTO members made clear that they did not consider China to be a developing country. At that time, members of the Working Party on China questioned China's claim to be a developing country and expressly denied China's right to self-elect developing country status under several WTO agreements. China's Protocol of Accession expressly took away the right of China to self-elect developing country status under the Subsidies Agreement, the Customs Valuation Agreement, the Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures, the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement). Most of the remaining WTO agreements either do not have a right of self-election, or the decision whether or not to accord China developing country status is left to another WTO member's investigating authorities, as in the case of the Antidumping Agreement.

In 2001, when China acceded to the WTO, the facts supported the approach taken by WTO members to deny China developing country status. As explained above, the facts continue to support that approach today.


U.S. EFFORTS TO ADDRESS TRADE DISTORTIONS CAUSED BY CHINA

As China's role in global trade has grown, its non-market economic system and state-led, mercantilist trade regime increasingly have disrupted international trade to the detriment of the United States and other WTO members. Rather than allow this harm to continue, the United States has pursued both bilateral and multilateral mechanisms in response. Through these efforts, the United States has sought to encourage China to fundamentally change its approach to the economy and trade. Over the past year, the United States also has taken corrective actions to limit the adverse effects of China's harmful practices. These efforts are described in more detail below.


Bilateral Engagement

Since China's accession to the WTO, the United States has repeatedly tried to work with China in a cooperative manner. Through many years of intensive, high-level dialogues, the United States urged China to pursue market-based policies and practices and to become a more responsible member of the WTO. As detailed in last year's report, these efforts largely failed because the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist Party were not sufficiently committed to adopting a true market economy or taking on a more responsible role at the WTO.

The United States has pursued various formal, high-level dialogues with China over the years, including previous dialogues like the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT), the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) and the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED) and a new dialogue known as the U.S.-China Comprehensive Economic Dialogue (CED), which was launched under this Administration in April 2017. While the United States approached these dialogues in good faith and put a great deal of effort into them, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States did secure broad commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but China repeatedly failed to follow through on those commitments.

For example, at the 2010 S&ED meeting, the 2012 S&ED meeting, the 2012 summit meeting between President Obama and President Xi and the 2014 JCCT meeting, China committed that foreign companies are free to base technology transfer decisions on business and market considerations and to independently negotiate and decide whether and under what circumstances to assign or license intellectual property rights to affiliated or unaffiliated enterprises. But China did not follow through on these commitments. China's regulatory authorities do not allow U.S. companies to make their own decisions about technology transfer and the assignment or licensing of intellectual property rights. Instead, they continue to require or pressure foreign companies to transfer technology as a condition for securing investment or other approvals.

In short, while China has sometimes shown a willingness to take modest steps to address isolated issues, it has consistently failed to follow through on significant commitments or to make fundamental changes to its trade regime.

With these dialogues proving to be largely ineffective, in August 2017, in response to direction from President Trump, USTR initiated an investigation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 to address and limit the adverse effects of certain state-led, mercantilist and non-market policies and practices of the Chinese government. Specifically, this investigation was initiated to focus on policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation.

Subsequently, when President Trump met with President Xi in Beijing in November 2017, four months after the CED meeting, the U.S. side explained that the United States had no interest in dialogues that go nowhere. The U.S. side also made clear that it was incumbent upon China to take action, not make more promises, and reiterated that the core problem with China's approach to trade lies in the state-led, mercantilist industrial policies that have continued to dominate China's non-market economy.

In March 2018, after a thorough review and analysis of the evidence, USTR issued a detailed report of its findings in the Section 301 investigation. With regard to each of the four categories of policies and practices under investigation, USTR found that China had engaged in a range of unfair and harmful conduct.

First, USTR found that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. firms.

Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients.

Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans.

Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, including trade secrets, and confidential business information, such as technical data, negotiating positions and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. The purpose of these actions is to support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization and economic development.

Based on these findings, the President instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to pursue a dispute settlement case at the WTO to address certain discriminatory technology licensing measures maintained by China. This case was launched in March 2018, and the proceedings are ongoing.

The President also instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to impose an additional tariff of 25 percent on approximately $50 billion worth of Chinese imports containing industrially significant technologies, including those related to China's Made in China 2025 industrial plan. These additional tariffs were imposed in two tranches, with $34 billion becoming effective in July 2018 and a further $16 billion becoming effective in August 2018. In a supplemental action under Section 301, following China's imposition of retaliatory tariffs, the U.S. Trade Representative imposed additional tariffs on a further $200 billion in Chinese imports, with the rate set at 10 percent effective in September 2018 and originally scheduled to rise to 25 percent in January 2019.

Finally, the President instructed the Secretary of the Treasury to address concerns about investment in the United States directed or facilitated by China in industries or technologies deemed important to the United States. Subsequently, in August 2018, FIRRMA was signed into law by the President. FIRRMA modernizes the tools for protecting the United States' critical technologies from harmful foreign acquisitions. It also strengthens the existing mechanism – administered by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) – for reviewing foreign investment in the United States for national security purposes and establishes a process for identifying emerging and foundational technologies that should be added to existing U.S. export controls. The Administration is now implementing this legislation with a view toward addressing the concerns regarding state-directed investment in critical technologies identified in the Section 301 investigation.

The Section 301 investigation and remedies prompted numerous high-level discussions between the United States and China. In May 2018, the United States proposed specific structural changes for China to become more open and market-oriented. These structural changes included actions not only in the area of forced technology transfer, but also in areas such as trade deficit reduction, tariffs, non-tariff barriers, intellectual property rights protection and enforcement, services market access and agricultural market access, among other areas.

China did not take any of the actions called for by the United States, nor did it commit that it would take any of those actions in the future. China did offer to make minor changes and modest increases in its purchases of U.S. goods and services, but even this offer was heavily conditioned. Accordingly, the United States continued to pressure China to make more significant structural changes.

On December 1, 2018, President Trump and China's President Xi met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, following a meeting of the G20 leaders. At the Presidents' meeting, it was agreed that the United States would suspend raising the tariff rate from 10 percent to 25 percent on $200 billion of Chinese goods, while the two sides engaged in negotiations for 90 days on the structural changes needed in China's trade regime and discussed China's additional purchases of U.S. goods and services. Absent a resolution within 90 days, the United States indicated that the 10 percent tariff rate would be raised to 25 percent on March 2, 2019. These discussions are ongoing.


WTO Dispute Settlement

The United States has actively pursued WTO dispute settlement cases involving China. To date, the United States has brought 23 WTO cases against China and has routinely prevailed in these disputes. However, the dispute settlement mechanism is of only limited value in addressing a situation where a WTO member is dedicated to a state-led trade regime that prevails over market forces. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is designed to address good faith disputes in which one member believes that another member has adopted a measure or taken an action that breaches a WTO obligation. This mechanism is not designed to address a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system. No amount of WTO dispute settlement by other WTO members would be sufficient to remedy this systemic problem. Indeed, many of the most harmful policies and practices being pursued by China are not even directly disciplined by WTO rules.

Under these circumstances, it is striking that China has recently indicated its support for proposals that would give more power to the WTO's Appellate Body. In other words, China has apparently concluded that the Appellate Body is more likely to protect China's non-market economic system than to pressure China to change that system. From this perspective, it is absurd to pretend that the challenges presented by China could be effectively resolved by increased reliance on the very process that China seeks to empower. Any suggestion that the United States or other WTO members could address the numerous problems outlined in this report solely by relying on the WTO dispute settlement mechanism is naïve in theory, and likely to prove downright harmful in practice.


New WTO Rules

In theory, the WTO membership could adopt new rules requiring members like China to abandon non-market economic systems and state-led, mercantilist trade regime. For several reasons, however, it is unrealistic to expect success in any negotiation of new WTO rules that would restrict China's current approach to the economy and trade in a meaningful way.

First, new WTO rules disciplining China would require agreement among all WTO members, including China. However, China has shown no willingness to make fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime, and it is therefore highly unlikely that China would agree to new disciplines targeted at its trade policies and practices. Indeed, in connection with ongoing discussions at the WTO relating to needed WTO reform, China has stated that it would not alter its non-market economic system.

Second, China has a long record of not pursuing ambitious outcomes at the WTO. Past agreements, even relatively narrow ones, have been difficult to achieve, and when an agreement is achieved, it is significantly less ambitious because of China's participation.

One relatively recent example is the negotiation to expand the Information Technology Agreement. This negotiation was launched in June 2012 by the United States and five other WTO members, with the hope of concluding an agreement to eliminate tariffs on a large number of additional information technology products by the time of the WTO Ministerial meeting in Bali, Indonesia, in December 2013. China joined the negotiation about six months after its launch and offered a much shorter, less ambitious list of products for coverage than had been under consideration. It also insisted on lengthy phase-in periods for approximately one-half of the products on its list. Because of China's intransigence, the negotiation stalled in November 2013. Eventually, the negotiation restarted, and an agreement was concluded in December 2015 at the WTO Ministerial meeting in Nairobi, Kenya. WTO members accounting for more than 90 percent of trade in information technology products signed on to the agreement. However, the product coverage was significantly reduced from what had been under consideration before China's involvement. In addition, China would only commit to lengthy phase-ins of its tariff-elimination commitments, and as a result China will not fully implement the agreement until July 2023, nearly 10 years after it originally joined the negotiation.

Other negotiations do not even lead to an agreement. Rather, they simply reach an impasse once China intervenes.

The attempt to negotiate an Environmental Goods Agreement (EGA) is one example. This negotiation began in July 2014 with 14 WTO members, accounting for more than 90 percent of global trade in environmental goods. Its objective was to eliminate tariffs on a number of important environment-related products. The negotiation made considerable progress until China expressed its views on an acceptable list of products to be covered. China's proposed list was much less ambitious than the list of products that the other participants had been considering. It also seemed designed to scuttle the negotiation by including products known to be off-limits for other participants. With China intransigent, all attempts to complete the negotiation of the EGA were abandoned one year later.

Another example is the negotiation of new WTO disciplines on fisheries subsidies, where the first draft of an agreement was presented in November 2007. A key reason why this negotiation has been unsuccessful is China's insistence on special and differential treatment as a developing country. In fact, China's fishing fleet is by far the largest in the world, China's annual fisheries harvest is more than double that of all other top producers, and China appears to provide substantial subsidies to its fisheries sector. As a result of China's participation, expectations for any agreement on effective disciplines are low.

Finally, as should be clear, China's continued insistence that it is a developing country significantly hinders the chances of meaningful progress in any type of WTO negotiation. In the unlikely event that members were able to reach a trade liberalizing agreement at the WTO, it likely would not significantly constrain China, as China would insist on availing itself of the "special and differential" treatment incorporated for the benefit of true developing country members. Moreover, because China refuses to recognize differentiation between varying levels of development among developing countries, true developing country members likely would not benefit from the most helpful treatment, as China would reject provisions crafted to make "special and differential" treatment available in ways targeted to address the difficulties that different types of developing country members confront when attempting to implement new obligations.


Effective Strategies

In the United States' view, like-minded WTO members should focus their efforts on developing and implementing effective strategies for fixing the unique and very serious problems posed by China and its trade regime. Given the limits of the current WTO rules and mechanisms, these strategies initially must include actions not currently set out in the WTO agreements, given the serious trade distortions and harm currently being caused by China's approach to the economy and trade. Until the United States and other WTO members are able to successfully persuade China to make the needed fundamental changes to its trade regime, the serious harm caused by China's approach to the economy and trade will persist and grow.

Faced with these facts, the United States intends to hold China accountable not only for strict adherence to the existing WTO rules, but also – out of necessity – for any unfair and market-distorting trade practices that hurt U.S. workers, businesses, farmers or ranchers. The United States will not allow the interventionist policies and practices of the Chinese state to continue harming this country. Until China transforms its approach to the economy and trade, the United States will take all appropriate actions to ensure that the costs of China's non-market economic system are borne by China, not by the United States.

The United States also will continue working with the EU and Japan in an important trilateral partnership focused on finding ways to address the systemic trade distortions caused by China's non-market economic system. Currently, among other things, the three partners are considering effective actions that can be taken in the near term. The three partners also are examining possible model rules for disciplining a state-led, mercantilist trade regime. As this work progresses, the three partners intend to reach out to other like-minded WTO members.

Meanwhile, the recent proposals by various WTO members for WTO reform seem only marginally focused on the China problem. While those reform proposals potentially could address some behaviors that make China an irresponsible member of the WTO, they do not directly address the serious threat that China and its state-led, mercantilist trade regime poses for individual WTO members and the multilateral trading system.

The United States is currently pursuing its many concerns bilaterally with China as part of the discussions established by President Trump and President Xi in Buenos Aries on December 1, 2018. Our hope is that China will take our concerns seriously and engage with us on a productive and comprehensive basis. If it does so, it will benefit not only the United States, but also China itself and the rest of the WTO membership.