2023 USTR REPORT TO CONGRESS ON CHINA'S WTO COMPLIANCE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In this report, we provide an updated assessment of China's WTO membership. This assessment reveals the unique and very serious challenge that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade continues to pose for the global trading community. While the United States and other like-minded WTO Members have pursued various WTO-focused strategies over the years to address the many problems created by China, it remains clear that new and more effective strategies – including strategies that involve taking actions outside the WTO where necessary – are critically needed to address those problems.

When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it voluntarily agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and to embed it in China's economic and trading system and institutions. China also agreed to take on the obligations set forth in existing WTO rules, while also making numerous China-specific commitments. As we previously documented, and as remains true today, China's record of compliance with these terms has been poor.

As has been previously documented, China has a long record of violating, disregarding and evading existing WTO rules. China has also sought to frustrate WTO oversight and accountability mechanisms, such as through its poor record of adhering to its WTO transparency obligations. In addition, and more critically, after more than two decades of WTO membership, China still embraces a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, despite other WTO Members' expectations – and China's own representations – that China would transform its economy and pursue the open, market-oriented approach endorsed by the WTO. In fact, China's embrace of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has increased rather than decreased over the past decade, and the mercantilism that it generates has harmed and disadvantaged U.S. companies and workers, as well as companies and workers of other WTO Members, often severely.

The vast majority of the harm that China inflicts upon other WTO Members is attributable not to China's periodic non-compliance with existing WTO rules, but rather to the daily impact of China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, which relies heavily on interventions in the market by the Chinese government and, increasingly in recent years, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP or the Party). As is well-documented, the Chinese government and the CCP routinely intervene in the market using a wide array of non-market policies and practices, both to provide artificial competitive advantages to Chinese industries and enterprises and to actively disadvantage foreign industries, enterprises and workers.

China's decision to continue pursuing a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade after acceding to the WTO takes on significantly added importance because China is the second largest economy in the world and the largest trader among WTO Members. As a result, as time has borne out, the policies and practices that it pursues can have a tremendous impact on bilateral and global trade.

As is now more than clear, China's approach to the economy and trade, which is characterized by a routine reliance on non-market policies and practices, undermines fair, market-oriented decisions made by foreign enterprises and distorts market outcomes in significant ways. Observers have coined various terms to describe China's economic system, from "state capitalism" to "China, Inc.," and, more recently, "CCP, Inc." Whatever terminology is used in an attempt to capture the essence of China's economic system, the unique challenge posed for the global trading community is clear. Foreign enterprises are competing not only against Chinese enterprises but also the Chinese state. As a result, the playing field is simply not level. It is heavily skewed against foreign enterprises wherever they seek to compete against Chinese enterprises, whether it is in China's market or in other markets around the world.

It is important to highlight, moreover, that China has not simply continued to pursue what it termed a "socialist market economy" when it joined the WTO. China's so-called "socialist market economy" has turned decidedly predatory. In other words, China no longer relies on central planning simply to direct and guide the business decisions of Chinese industries and enterprises. Rather, China is now using its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade in ways designed to secure the dominance of Chinese enterprises, both in the China market and in global markets. As part of this pursuit of international dominance, China is targeting both traditional industries and emerging industries, not only by providing its own industries with unprecedented financial and regulatory support but also by actively pursuing policies and practices that are calculated to disadvantage and ultimately displace foreign competitors.

Over the years, the non-market policies and practices that China has deployed as it seeks to achieve and maintain the dominance of Chinese industries and enterprises are myriad. They are also constantly evolving. While the particular combination of non-market policies and practices that China deploys in pursuit of securing dominant market shares for Chinese businesses domestically and globally can vary from industry to industry, any list of the most common non-market policies and practices that the Chinese state currently deploys is long and includes:

- adopting and pursuing industrial plans that target specific industries for domination by Chinese enterprises, including by establishing capacity, production and export levels or market share targets;

- directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises adhere to the objectives set forth in the state's industrial plans;

- placing CCP officials in state-owned enterprises and private Chinese enterprises in management positions in order to monitor, direct, pressure or otherwise influence commercial decision making;

- deploying massive and frequently non-transparent subsidies relentlessly in pursuit of industrial plan objectives, including via policy banks, state-owned commercial banks and government investment and guidance funds at all levels of government;

- transferring risk to the state through loan guarantees and loan rollovers for Chinese enterprises in targeted industries;

- failing to publish final central level and provincial level measures that provide subsidies or other financial support to Chinese enterprises;

- directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that foreign enterprises operating in China not make business decisions that conflict with the objectives of the state's industrial plans, including in some cases by embedding CCP officials in those enterprises;

- according special regulatory and other preferences and competitive advantages to state-owned enterprises;

- directing or allowing government regulatory authorities to exercise their authority in a discriminatory manner, including by treating Chinese enterprises more favorably than foreign or foreign-invested enterprises;

- directing or sponsoring the theft of intellectual property rights, trade secrets and confidential business information for commercial use;

- engaging in forced or pressured technology transfer;

- directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises pursue acquisitions of foreign enterprises whose technologies are needed to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

- directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises purchase Chinese-made products over imported products in accordance with the state's industrial plan objectives;

- directing, pressuring or otherwise acting to ensure that Chinese enterprises invest in and secure access to raw materials outside of China for the sole use of Chinese enterprises producing downstream products in accordance with the state's industrial plan objectives;

- retaliating against foreign enterprises when they offend the Chinese state or otherwise act in a manner that displeases the Chinese state, thereby creating a chilling business environment for all foreign enterprises, especially ones with business operations located in China;

- using selective or arbitrary application or enforcement of intellectual property law to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

- using selective or arbitrary application or enforcement of competition law to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives;

- pursuing unique national standards when international standards already exist in order to leverage the economic power of China's market to promote or compel the adoption of those standards in global markets;

- using unfair labor practices, such as forced labor, restrictions on labor mobility, institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management, the denial of the rights of workers to associate and to organize and collectively bargain, and a prohibition on the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, which artificially lower labor costs for Chinese enterprises, especially in industrial sectors;

- condoning lax enforcement of environmental laws and regulations, which artificially lowers labor costs for Chinese enterprises, especially in industrial sectors;

- creating or maintaining persistent non-market excess capacity in industries through state-owned enterprises and private Chinese enterprises, to the detriment of competing foreign enterprises in the China market and in global markets around the world;

- directing the judiciary to render decisions that serve the state's industrial plan objectives; and

- failing to publish all central level and provincial level laws, regulations and other measures that impact the rights and obligations of enterprises and individuals.

It is evident that China does not deploy these non-market policies and practices in isolation or only in a few industries. China resorts to some combination of these non-market policies and practices in many industries. China's efforts are also relentless. China has shown every indication that it will continue to intervene in the market in any way that it deems necessary to achieve the state's industrial plan objectives. China does not act with moderation.

An example of the magnitude of China's efforts can be seen in a review of how China pursues one type of non-market policy or practice, namely, China's practice of directing or sponsoring the theft of intellectual property rights, trade secrets and confidential business information for commercial use. In recent public remarks, intelligence and law enforcement officials from the Five Eyes countries – Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States – characterized the scale of the Chinese state's pursuit and sponsorship of this type of theft as unprecedented in human history. They added that it is the biggest of any country in the world and, indeed, bigger than every other country in the world combined. In the United States alone, in 2023, there were approximately 2,000 active investigations into apparent state-sponsored theft by China covering a diverse array of industries, from aviation to biotechnology to robotics, among many others. The Five Eyes officials noted that while all countries engage in clandestine activities for national security purposes, China is different in that the Chinese state steals information and then uses it for commercial advantage.

Plainly, China's approach is far different from the open, market-oriented approach envisioned by the WTO membership and pursued by the United States and almost all other WTO Members. China routinely deploys economic and trade policies and practices that promote unfair competition and state-directed outcomes rather than fair competition and market-based outcomes. China often does not enable or allow enterprises to make their own commercial decisions, nor does it treat all enterprises engaged in commercial activities equally or allow private actors to determine the allocation of resources. China also does not require its regulatory authorities to administer in a fair, transparent, impartial and reasonable manner all laws, regulations and other measures pertaining to or affecting trade in goods, trade in services, investment and trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights. In addition, China does not maintain an independent judiciary, nor does it publish all laws, regulations and other measures that impact the rights and obligations of enterprises and individuals.

At present, moreover, there are no indications that China is considering taking meaningful steps toward the adoption of the open, market-oriented economic system that the WTO membership has endorsed and expects of all WTO Members. In fact, China continues to take steps designed to increase, not decrease, the role of the Chinese state in the market.

Critically, the WTO has been unable to effectively address China's continued pursuit of a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. While some of the non-market policies and practices pursued by China are disciplined by existing WTO rules, resort to WTO dispute settlement has proven ineffective in changing or discouraging China's behavior in any fundamental way. For the most part, however, it has become clear that China's non-market policies and practices are not effectively disciplined by existing WTO rules. Indeed, when WTO Members developed and agreed on the existing WTO rules, they simply did not contemplate that a WTO Member would ever pursue many of the policies and practices that now emanate from China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. In short, China's approach is fundamentally at odds with the multilateral trading system.

It is now more than two decades since China joined the WTO, and it is clear that China has not lived up to the bargain that it struck with WTO Members when it acceded to the WTO, as recounted above. With existing WTO disciplines having proved to be ineffective, or simply not designed to discipline many of the types of harmful non-market policies and practices deployed by the Chinese state, it is also clear – and has been clear for some time – that solutions independent of the WTO are needed.

While the WTO can still play a role in addressing certain aspects of the unique challenge that China poses for the global trading community, the United States believes, realistically, that other strategies are needed. For that reason, the United States has been pursuing a multi-faceted approach that accounts for the current realities in the U.S.-China trade relationship and the many problems that China generates for the United States and other trading partners, both now and likely in the future. As the U.S. Trade Representative previously announced, the U.S. approach includes four principal components.

First, it is critical that the United States take steps domestically to invest in, and build policies supportive of, the industries of today and tomorrow. Important steps taken to date include the passage of the CHIPS and Science Act, the Inflation Reduction Act and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as well as the many subsequent efforts to implement those Acts.

Second, the United States is continuing to pursue bilateral engagement with China. China is an important trading partner, and every avenue for obtaining real change in its economic and trade regime must be utilized. We are focused on the United States' most fundamental concerns with China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, enumerated above, rather than on resuming dialogues focused on isolated issues that leave the core China challenge unaddressed. At the same time, the United States will continue to work to hold China accountable for its existing commitments.

Third, it is clear that domestic trade tools – including updated or new domestic trade tools reflecting today's realities – will be necessary to secure a more level playing field for U.S. workers and businesses. The United States continues to explore how best to use and improve domestic trade tools to achieve that end.

Finally, it is equally critical for the United States to work intensely and broadly with allies and like-minded partners in order to build support for solutions to the many significant problems that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade has created for the global trading community. The United States recognizes that each trading partner may be impacted differently by the many types of non-market policies and practices that China pursues, but we all must work together if we are to be able to find viable solutions. This work is ongoing and is taking place in bilateral, regional and multilateral fora, including the WTO.

Importantly, among U.S. trading partners, there is a growing convergence about the need to approach trade relations with China with more realism, like the United States has been doing. China's increased use of economic coercion in recent years has certainly played a role in this convergence. As its economic power has grown, the Chinese government more and more has resorted to the threat or use of measures affecting trade and investment in an abusive, arbitrary or pretextual manner to pressure, induce or influence a foreign government into taking, or not taking, a decision or action in order to achieve a strategic political or policy objective, or to prevent or interfere with the foreign government's exercise of its legitimate sovereign rights or choices. It is particularly troubling to witness an authoritarian government using economic coercion to influence the policies being pursued by democratic countries. However, even so, the more significant factor in this convergence of thinking is the incontrovertible evidence of the significant harm being caused by China's state-led, non-market – and predatory – approach to the economy and trade. Indeed, this harm is not confined to the advanced market economies, as emerging and developing economies tend to be particularly adversely impacted by China's non-market policies and practices.

At the same time, despite China's rhetoric, the United States does not view "decoupling" from China as the solution to the many problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. Indeed, if the United States were to decouple from China, it would not address those problems.

The United States has taken targeted actions, including on export controls and outbound investment, to protect our national security, consistent with our approach to the U.S.-China economic and trade relationship, which is more appropriately characterized as one of de-risking and diversifying, not decoupling. Because the Chinese government continually intervenes in the market and actively seeks to advantage Chinese enterprises and disadvantage foreign enterprises, the United States is not in a position to rely on the good will of the Chinese state when it comes to supply chains, especially for critical minerals. Similarly, U.S. companies with operations in China are not able to have confidence that they will be treated fairly by the Chinese state, and they increasingly are re-evaluating the degree of their dependence on the China market.

Nevertheless, the United States still seeks to trade with China, just as the United States seeks to do with other countries. But the terms of competition must be fair. U.S. companies and workers need to be able to compete on a level playing field with Chinese companies and workers, whether in the U.S. market, China's market or other markets around the world. For two-way trade to expand, both the United States and China need to be committed to it. But questions remain about China's commitment, as China itself appears to be pursuing a decoupling strategy – and not just from the United States.

China's "dual circulation" strategy, in place since 2020, touts the importance of China continuing to participate in international trade, while simultaneously seeking to become self-sufficient domestically. What this means in reality is that, for now, China will continue to export to the world (often at predatory prices), including the negative externalities from its industrial policies, and China will continue to welcome foreign companies operating in China and continue to import products needed by Chinese companies, especially in technology products. However, once Chinese companies are capable of displacing the foreign competition in any particular industry in the China market, the Chinese state will no longer welcome foreign companies and their products.

Another by-product of China's drive for domestic self-sufficiency, of course, is the non-market excess capacity that it inevitably creates, to the detriment of foreign producers and efficient investment around the world. Indeed, in 2022, China accounted for the largest global trade surplus in the history of the world, totaling $877.6 billion, which was more than three times the total for the country with the next largest global trade surplus, Russia.

Whatever term might best describe China's "dual circulation" strategy, it is plainly not a strategy ever envisioned by, or condoned by, the WTO membership. The autarky that this strategy envisions runs counter to the WTO's goal of developing an integrated, more viable and durable multilateral trading system. In other words, this strategy is best viewed as further evidence of China's broader intent to re-shape the international order and move the world away from rules-based engagement premised on market-based competition.

The United States, in contrast, remains committed to the WTO and the shared values upon which it is based, including openness, fair competition, non-discrimination, reciprocity and transparency as well as adherence to the rule of law. But serious challenges threaten those core values, most notably the challenge posed by the policies and practices that emanate from China's state-led, non-market – and predatory – approach to the economy and trade.


INTRODUCTION

In this report, we first provide a broad assessment of China's WTO membership to date. Next, we discuss past strategies that have been used, without success, in an attempt to address the many problems that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade creates for the United States and other WTO Members. We then describe the nature of the China challenge as it exists today and explain how the United States' trade policy is dealing with it. Lastly, we catalogue, on a topic-by-topic basis, the many specific trade concerns generated by China's outlier behavior.


ASSESSMENT OF CHINA'S WTO MEMBERSHIP

In assessing China's WTO membership below, we first recall the terms of China's accession to the WTO. As explained below, these terms included commitments to adhere to the rules and principles set forth in the WTO agreements as well as an unprecedented number of China-specific commitments intended to facilitate China's intended transition to a market economy. These terms also included an expectation that China would pursue an open and market-oriented approach to the economy and trade, like other WTO Members. After reviewing the terms of China's accession to the WTO, we then review China's record of compliance, which has been poor.


CHINA'S WTO ACCESSION

In July of 1986, China applied for admission to the WTO's predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The GATT formed a Working Party in March of 1987, composed of all interested GATT contracting parties, to examine China's application and negotiate terms for China's accession. For the next eight years, negotiations were conducted under the auspices of the GATT Working Party. Following the formation of the WTO on January 1, 1995, pursuant to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement), a successor WTO Working Party, composed of all interested WTO Members, took over the negotiations.

Like all WTO accession negotiations, the negotiations with China had three basic aspects. First, China provided information to the Working Party regarding its trade regime. China also updated this information periodically during the 15 years of negotiations to reflect changes in its trade regime. Second, each interested WTO Member negotiated bilaterally with China regarding market access concessions and commitments in the goods and services areas, including, for example, the tariffs that would apply on industrial and agricultural goods and the commitments that China would make to open up its market to foreign services suppliers. The most trade liberalizing of the concessions and commitments obtained through these bilateral negotiations were consolidated into China's Goods and Services Schedules and apply to all WTO Members. Third, overlapping in time with these bilateral negotiations, China engaged in multilateral negotiations with Working Party members on the rules that would govern trade with China. Throughout these multilateral negotiations, U.S. leadership in working with China was critical to removing obstacles to China's WTO accession and achieving a consensus on appropriate rules commitments. These commitments are set forth in China's Protocol of Accession and an accompanying Report of the Working Party.

WTO Members formally approved an agreement on the terms of accession for China on November 10, 2001, at the WTO's Fourth Ministerial Conference, held in Doha, Qatar. One day later, China signed the agreement and deposited its instrument of ratification with the Director-General of the WTO. China became the 143rd member of the WTO on December 11, 2001. China's Protocol of Accession, accompanying Working Party Report and Goods and Services Schedules are available on the WTO's website (www.wto.org).

To accede to the WTO, China agreed to take concrete steps to remove trade barriers and open its markets to foreign companies and their exports from the first day of accession in virtually every product sector and for a wide range of services. Supporting these steps, China also agreed to undertake important changes to its legal framework, designed to add transparency and predictability to business dealings.

Like all acceding WTO Members, China also agreed to assume the obligations of more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements. Areas of principal concern to the United States and China's other trading partners, as evidenced by the accession negotiations, included core principles of the WTO, such as most-favored nation treatment, national treatment, transparency and the availability of independent review of administrative decisions. Other key concerns arose in the areas of agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, trade-related investment measures, customs valuation, rules of origin, import licensing, antidumping, subsidies and countervailing measures, trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights and services. For some of its obligations, China was allowed minimal transition periods, where it was considered necessary.

Through its membership in the WTO, China also became subject to the same expectations as other WTO Members, as set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, among other things, WTO Members expressly affirmed their view that the WTO Member economies would participate in the international trading system based on "open, market-oriented policies."

Even though the terms of China's accession agreement are directed at the opening of China's market to WTO Members, China's accession agreement also includes provisions designed to address issues related to any injury that U.S. or other WTO Members' industries and workers might experience based on import surges or unfair trade practices, particularly during what was envisioned to be a time of transition for China from a non-market economy to a market economy. These mechanisms include: (1) a special textile safeguard mechanism (which expired on December 11, 2008, seven years after China's WTO accession); (2) a unique, China-specific safeguard mechanism allowing a WTO Member to take action against increasing Chinese imports that disrupt its market (which expired on December 11, 2013, 12 years after China's WTO accession); (3) an expression of the ability of WTO Members to use an antidumping methodology that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market economy conditions prevail in the industry producing the like product with regard to the manufacture, production and sale of that product; and (4) an expression of the ability to use methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits to Chinese enterprises that are not based on terms and conditions prevailing in China.

With China's consent, the WTO also created a special multilateral mechanism for reviewing China's compliance on an annual basis. Known as the Transitional Review Mechanism, this mechanism operated annually for eight years after China's accession. A final review, looking back over the first 10 years of China's WTO membership, took place in 2011.


EXPECTATIONS OF WTO MEMBERSHIP

For all WTO Members, the expectations of WTO membership are clearly set forth in the Marrakesh Declaration issued in April 1994 at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. There, WTO Members expressly affirmed their view that the establishment of the WTO ushers in a "new era of global economic cooperation" that "reflect[s] the widespread desire to operate in a fairer and more open multilateral trading system." WTO Members further made clear their determination that their economies would participate in the international trading system, based on both "open, market-oriented policies" and "the commitments set out in the Uruguay Round Agreements and Decisions."

As this language makes clear, it was not contemplated that any WTO Member would reject market-based policies in favor of a state-led trade regime. It also was not contemplated that any WTO Member would pursue mercantilist outcomes instead of policies promoting a fairer and more open multilateral trading system. Rather, it was expected that each WTO Member would pursue open, market-oriented policies. The pursuit of open, market-oriented policies means not only adhering to the agreed rules but also observing in good faith the fundamental principles that run throughout the many WTO agreements, which include non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency.

When China acceded to the WTO in 2001, it agreed to embrace the WTO's open, market-oriented approach and embed it in its trading system and institutions. Through China's commitments and representations, WTO Members understood that China intended to dismantle existing state-led, mercantilist policies and practices, and they expected China to continue on its then-existing path of economic reform and successfully complete a transformation to a market-oriented economy and trade regime.

China's protocol of accession to the WTO sets out China's obligations under the WTO agreements as well as numerous additional China-specific commitments made necessary because of the need for China to transform its approach to the economy and trade. China itself acknowledged "the evolving nature of its economy," and it confirmed that "a socialist market economy system was applied" in China. Similarly, WTO Members highlighted that "China was continuing the process of transition towards a full market economy." WTO Members noted, for example, that "the special features of China's economy, in its present state of reform, still created the potential for a certain level of trade-distorting subsidization."

For these reasons, it was agreed that special safeguard-like provisions would be included among the terms of China's protocol of accession as protective measures while China completed its transformation into a market economy. As noted above, for example, China's protocol of accession included a China-specific safeguard mechanism, special antidumping rules and special methodologies for identifying and measuring subsidy benefits. It also created a unique, 10-year review mechanism designed to monitor China's progress in implementing its many WTO commitments and to secure updated information on the use of industrial plans by China.


CHINA'S WTO COMPLIANCE RECORD

As has been catalogued in prior reports, China has a poor record when it comes to complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based − non-discrimination, openness, reciprocity, fairness and transparency. Too often, China flouts the rules to achieve industrial domination objectives. In addition, and of serious concern to the United States and other WTO Members, China has not made sufficient progress in transitioning toward a market economy. China continues to embrace a state-led, non-market and mercantilist approach to the economy and trade. This approach results in sophisticated and expansive policies and practices that often evade effective WTO disciplines and cause serious harm to markets, workers and industries in the United States and other WTO Members. At the same time, China has used the benefits of WTO membership – including its guarantee of open, non-discriminatory access to the markets of other WTO Members – to become the WTO's largest trader, while resisting calls for further liberalization of its trade regime by claiming to be a "developing" country.


ADOPTION OF MARKET-ORIENTED POLICIES

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of transitioning to a market economy has not changed. More than two decades after its accession to the WTO, China has still not embraced open, market-oriented policies. The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve anticompetitive industrial policy objectives. Indeed, the state's already sizable role continues to grow, not recede.

As we detailed in prior reports, China pursues a wide array of continually evolving interventionist policies and practices. It offers substantial government guidance, resources and regulatory support to domestic industries, including China's state-owned enterprises and numerous other domestic companies. At the same time, it also seeks to limit market access for imported goods and services and restrict the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China in various ways. The benefits that China's industries realize from these non-market policies and practices largely come at the expense of China's trading partners and their workers and companies, as markets all over the world are distorted, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

This situation has worsened over the past decade. Since new leaders assumed power in China in 2013, the state's role in the economy – effectuated by the Chinese government and, increasingly, the CCP – has grown. While China has repeatedly signaled in recent years that it is pursuing "economic reform," China's concept of "economic reform" differs from the type of change that a country would be pursuing if it were embracing open, market-oriented policies. For China, "economic reform" appears to mean deepening the management of the economy by the government and the Party and strengthening state-owned and state-invested enterprises. Meanwhile, as the state's role in the economy has increased in recent years, the depth and breadth of challenges facing U.S. and other foreign companies doing business in China – or competing with favored Chinese companies in markets outside of China – have similarly increased.

To fully appreciate the challenges presented by China's non-market economy, it is vital to understand the extent to which the state still maintains control over economic decision-making in China. As we catalogued in prior reports, a thorough examination of China's Constitution, relevant directives and pronouncements by China's leadership, legislative and regulatory measures issued by the Chinese government, China's industrial plans and the actions of the Chinese government and the CCP leave no doubt that the state maintains a tight grip on virtually all economic activity. Indeed, the government and the Party have constitutional mandates to develop a "socialist market economy with Chinese characteristics." To fulfill these mandates, the framework of China's economy is set by the government and the Party, which exercise control directly and indirectly over the allocation of resources through instruments such as government ownership and control of key economic actors and innumerable government directives. The government and the Party also direct and channel economic actors to meet the state's planning targets. The government and the Party permit market forces to operate only to the extent that they accord with China's industrial policy objectives, which typically target industries for domination by Chinese companies. When there is conflict between market outcomes and the state's objectives, the government and the Party intervene to ensure that the state's objectives prevail.

Aside from the role of the government and the Party in managing the economy, there are also serious concerns over how the government and the Party exercise influence over the operations and investment decisions of state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private enterprises, including foreign-invested enterprises. This influence continues to grow, as the Party is increasing its control over key actors in China's economy and not, as had been hoped, enabling China's transition to a market economy.

China claims that its state-owned and state-invested enterprises make business decisions independently of the state and based on market principles. However, the government and the Party continue to exercise control over state-owned and state-invested enterprises. Among other things, they appoint and control key executives through the Chinese Communist Party Organization Department. They also provide state-owned and state-invested enterprises with preferential access to important inputs (such as land and capital) and other competitive advantages unavailable to private Chinese companies. State-owned and state-invested enterprises, in turn, play an outsized role in China's economy. For example, state-owned and state-invested enterprises outstrip private Chinese companies in terms of their share of total credit, their market dominance in key industries and their share of total market capitalization on China's stock market.

Both state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies also host internal Party committees capable of exercising government and Party influence over their corporate governance and business decisions. This arrangement is codified in Chinese law under Article 19 of the Company Law, which applies to both state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies. In recent years, moreover, the Party has taken steps to increase the strength and presence of Party committees within all of these companies. For example, state-owned and state-invested enterprises and private Chinese companies are being pressured to amend their articles of association to ensure Party representation on their boards of directors, usually as the Chairman of the Board, and to ensure that important company decisions are made in consultation with Party cells.

Increasingly in recent years, China has also taken "golden shares" in large private Chinese companies. Under this type of arrangement, the Chinese government via a government guidance fund or other state-backed entity purchases a small stake in the company in exchange for a seat on the board of directors or veto rights. The result is stronger Chinese government oversight and control of the company's operations.

As we explained in prior reports, U.S. industry associations report that the Party is also taking steps to influence the managerial and investment decisions of foreign-invested enterprises in China through the insertion of Party cells. According to these reports, these efforts, in some cases, are beginning to affect the decision-making processes of some Chinese-foreign joint ventures in China.

Further reinforcing the Party's influence over enterprises in China is the Social Credit System, a tool endorsed by the Party that the government is increasingly using to monitor, rate and condition not only the conduct of all individuals in China, but also all domestic and foreign companies in China. This system has become operational, but so far there is no fully integrated national system for assigning comprehensive social credit scores for companies, and the social credit system remains highly fragmented, as local governments experiment with their own pilot social credit schemes. In any event, it appears that the government will use the threat of poor ratings and corresponding adverse consequences under the Social Credit System, among other things, to ensure that all economic actors in China operate in accordance with China's industrial policy objectives and do not cross political redlines on sensitive matters like human rights.

Separate from these various mechanisms used to control company behavior, the government and the Party continue to control or otherwise influence the prices of key factors of production. The result is that the means of production in China are not allocated or priced according to market principles. For example, all land in China is property of the state, as either state-owned urban land or collectively owned rural land. The state also exerts a high degree of control over energy and other input prices. In addition, there are significant institutional constraints on the extent to which wage rates are determined through free bargaining between labor and management, contrary to International Labor Organization principles. China denies workers the right of association and the right to organize and collectively bargain. China prohibits the formation of independent trade unions to represent workers, and workers do not have the legal right to strike, which is an important lever in collective action and negotiation with management over wages in market economies. In addition, government restrictions on labor mobility continue to inhibit and guide labor flows, causing distortions on the supply side of the labor market.

The government and the Party also exercise strong control over the financial sector. Five large commercial banks that are majority state-owned entities operate large branch networks on a nationwide basis and account for nearly half of total commercial bank assets. There are also three large state-owned policy banks, as well as scores of city commercial banks and credit unions under local government control. In addition to the ownership of these banks by the government, the state exercises other forms of influence over banking decisions. The Party, through its Organization Department, appoints executives in state-owned banks and other state-owned financial institutions. China's central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC), also meets frequently with large banks in China to ensure that their lending decisions align with PBOC and government objectives. In addition, the Law on Commercial Banks provides that "commercial banks are to conduct their business of lending in accordance with the needs of national economic and social development and under the guidance of the industrial policies of the state."

Similarly, China's legal system continues to function as an instrument by which the government and the Party can secure discrete economic outcomes, channel broader economic policy and pursue the state's industrial policy objectives. Key legal institutions, such as the courts, are structured to respond to the Party's direction, both broadly and on a case-specific basis. As a general matter, to the extent that companies and individuals seek to act independently of government or Party direction, the legal system does not provide a venue for them to achieve these objectives on a systemic or consistent basis. In addition, companies and individuals continue to face challenges in obtaining impartial outcomes, either because of protectionism or corruption.

The larger issue of China's restrictions on the freedom of information also impacts China's economic system. For example, while China's Internet firewall and the Party's regular censorship of audio-visual and print media have many negative effects outside China's economic system, they also create distortions in China's economy, and these distortions affect the ability of foreign companies to operate and compete effectively in China's market.

In March 2021, China finalized and issued the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025) for National Economic and Social Development, which runs from 2021 through 2025. Like its predecessor, the 14th Five-year Plan covers all sectors of China's economy and is not limited to one overarching plan, but instead will include hundreds of sub-plans. In this regard, various institutions participate in plan formulation and execution, including central government bodies with legislative and regulatory authority, thousands of provincial and local government authorities, various organs of the Party and key Chinese companies.

When compared to the industrial plans of other WTO Members, China's industrial plans are not merely more extensive. They are also fundamentally different in kind. In several significant ways, China's industrial plans go well beyond traditional approaches to guiding and supporting domestic industries:

First, adherence to the objectives of China's industrial plans is effectively mandatory. Chinese companies have little discretion to ignore them, even when market forces would dictate different commercial behavior.

Second, the financial support that the state provides to domestic industries in pursuit of China's industrial plan objectives is massive, relentless and highly market-distorting. Indeed, this financial support is provided on a scale never before seen in the world, and much of it is not transparently provided. As previously noted, this financial support often leads to severe excess capacity in China – followed by China's widespread dumping of the inevitable excess production into the markets of other WTO Members, which not only depresses global prices but also distorts investment decisions by market actors in markets around the world. This assault on global markets causes serious harm to other WTO Members' industries, companies and workers, while the WTO does not provide effective mechanisms for addressing this problem.

Third, China's industrial planning is more comprehensive and complex than in any other country, as it is made up of hundreds of plans across industries and at all levels of government.

Fourth, in pursuit of its industrial plan objectives, China goes well beyond merely guiding or supporting the development of domestic industries as it actively seeks to impede, disadvantage and harm the foreign competition by skewing the playing field against imported goods and services and foreign manufacturers and services suppliers. Indeed, China actively targets entire industries for domination by Chinese companies, often by explicitly setting market share goals that it pursues through a wide array of non-market policies and practices. In other words, China's approach to industrial planning is fundamentally predatory in nature.

When combined with the large size of China's economy and China's large share of global trade, the policies and practices that China pursues in support of its industrial plans transform China into a unique and pressing challenge for the United States and other market economies as well as for the WTO and the multilateral trading system. Moreover, this troubling situation is not static. China continues to develop and implement new policies and practices to maintain and enhance the state's control over the economy and trade.


COMPLIANCE WITH WTO RULES

Since last year's report, our assessment of China's record in terms of complying with WTO rules and observing the fundamental principles on which the WTO agreements are based has not changed. China's record remains poor.

As we detailed in prior reports, China's economic and trade regime has generated many WTO compliance concerns over the years. Too often, WTO Members have had to resort to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism to change problematic Chinese policies and practices. The United States, for example, has brought 27 cases against China at the WTO covering a wide range of important policies and practices, such as: (1) discriminatory requirements in the automobile sector; (2) discriminatory taxes in the integrated circuit sector; (3) hundreds of prohibited subsidies in a wide range of manufacturing sectors; (4) inadequate intellectual property rights enforcement in the copyright area; (5) significant market access barriers in copyright-intensive industries; (6) severe restrictions on foreign suppliers of financial information services; (7) export restraints on numerous raw materials; (8) a denial of market access for foreign suppliers of electronic payment services; (9) repeated improper use of trade remedies; (10) excessive domestic support for key agricultural commodities; (11) the opaque and protectionist administration of tariff-rate quotas for key agricultural commodities; and (12) discriminatory regulations on technology licensing. Even though the United States prevailed in these WTO disputes, as other WTO Members have done in their disputes against China, they take years to litigate, consume significant resources and often require further efforts when China fails to comply with WTO rules.

In addition, China has often taken steps to obscure its actions to make it more difficult for trading partners to even challenge them in the WTO's adjudicative system. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism was designed to facilitate the resolution of disagreements over whether an action breaches a WTO obligation, but where the action is so obscured that it is difficult to demonstrate it as a factual matter, the dispute settlement mechanism can fail to be an effective disciplinary tool. In this regard, as USTR has explained in prior reports, China disregards many of its WTO transparency obligations, which places its trading partners at a disadvantage and often serves as a cloak for China to conceal unfair, non-market and distortive trade policies and practices from scrutiny.

For example, during the first 15 years of its WTO membership, China failed to notify any sub-central government subsidies to the WTO, despite the fact that most subsidies in China are provided by provincial and local governments. The magnitude and significance of this problem is illustrated by the five WTO cases that the United States has brought challenging prohibited subsidies maintained by China. While those cases involved hundreds of subsidies, most of the subsidies were provided by sub-central governments. The United States was able to bring those cases only because of its own extensive investigatory efforts to uncover China's opaque subsidization practices. Most other WTO Members lack the resources to conduct the same types of investigations.

Despite these efforts, China continued to shield massive sub-central government subsidies from the scrutiny of other WTO Members, while in recent years also obscuring massive central government subsidies provided through a newer vehicle known as "government guidance funds." While China claims that these government guidance funds are wholly private, the facts plainly reveal that the funds are run by government agencies and state-owned enterprises and provide state capital to Chinese companies. Together with other complimentary non-market practices, the massive and relentless subsidization provided by China's central government and sub-central governments distorts global markets and contributes to the serious excess capacity problems that have been plaguing industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fishing and have been devastating foreign competitors. Similar results can be expected in other industries now being targeted by China for dominance.

In sum, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism has not been effective in addressing the serious issues that arise from a WTO Member's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade that systematically disadvantages that Member's trading partners and broadly conflicts with the fundamental, market-oriented underpinnings of the WTO system. The value of the dispute settlement mechanism is also undermined where a WTO Member does not operate in good faith. As a result, over time, despite the enforcement efforts of the United States and other WTO Members, China was able to continue to pursue its predatory non-market policies and practices, which WTO rules and the dispute settlement mechanism have proven unable to discipline effectively.


PAST EFFORTS TO ADDRESS THE CHINA CHALLENGE

In the past, the United States has intensively pursued both WTO-focused strategies and strategies outside the WTO in an effort to address the unique challenge posed by China. Other WTO Members have also made similar efforts. Those strategies have been unsuccessful in securing fundamental changes in China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.


WTO-FOCUSED STRATEGIES

For many years following China's accession to the WTO, a variety of bilateral and multilateral efforts were pursued by the United States and other WTO Members to address the unique challenges presented by China's WTO membership. However, even though these efforts were persistent, they did not result in meaningful changes in China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

The United States itself pursued a dual track approach in an effort to resolve the many concerns that arose in our trade relationship with China. One track involved using high-level bilateral dialogues, and the other track focused on enforcement at the WTO.

The United States approached its bilateral dialogues with China in good faith and put a great deal of effort into them. These dialogues were intended to push China toward complying with and internalizing WTO rules and principles and making necessary market-oriented changes. However, they only achieved isolated, incremental progress. At times, the United States did secure broad commitments from China for fundamental shifts in the direction of Chinese policies and practices, but China repeatedly failed to follow through on them. Moreover, over time, commitments from China became more difficult to secure.

Meanwhile, at the WTO, the United States brought 27 cases against China, often in collaboration with like-minded WTO Members. The United States secured victories in every one of its cases that was decided. Other WTO Members were also successful in many cases that they brought against China. Still, even when China changed the specific practices that had been challenged, it did not typically change the underlying policies, and meaningful reforms by China remained elusive.

As has become clear, the WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is of only limited value in addressing a situation where a WTO Member is dedicated to a state-led economic and trade regime that prevails over market forces. The WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is designed to address good faith disputes in which one Member believes that another Member has adopted a measure or taken an action that breaches a WTO obligation. This mechanism is not designed to address a trade regime that broadly conflicts with the fundamental underpinnings of the WTO system. No amount of WTO dispute settlement by other WTO Members would be sufficient to remedy this systemic problem. Indeed, many of the most harmful policies and practices being pursued by China are not even directly disciplined by WTO rules.

Overreaching by the WTO's Appellate Body in deciding WTO dispute settlement cases has also shielded China's non-market policies and practices from discipline and has affirmatively undermined the efforts of the United States and other WTO Members to protect our workers and businesses from the harmful impacts of China's predatory non-market economic system. The Appellate Body's erroneous substantive interpretations have undermined core values, such as the ability to protect workers and businesses from non-market economic harms, to promote democracy and human rights or to protect human health or the environment. At the same time, China has sought to use the WTO dispute settlement system to subject U.S. national security measures to review, pursuing a strategy that would convert the WTO into a permanent venue for national security disagreements. As a result, the United States has been clear that fundamental reform is needed to ensure a well-functioning WTO dispute settlement system that supports WTO Members in the resolution of their disputes and in doing so limits the needless complexity and interpretive overreach seen in recent years. Among the objectives for reform, the United States has been clear that the dispute settlement system should preserve the policy space in WTO rules for WTO Members to address their critical societal interests and to support, rather than undermine, the WTO's role as a forum for discussion and negotiation. Most critically, fundamental reform must ensure that the WTO respects the essential security interests of WTO Members, including the United States.

Over the years, in addition to pursuing WTO dispute settlement cases, the United States has actively participated in meetings at the WTO addressing China's adherence to its WTO obligations. For example, the United States took on a leading role in the numerous China-specific Transitional Review Mechanism meetings from 2002 through 2011, which involved annual meetings of most WTO committees and councils. However, China consistently approached these meetings in ways that frustrated WTO Members' efforts to secure a meaningful assessment of China's compliance efforts. The United States also raised, as it continues to do, China-related issues at regular meetings of WTO committees and councils, including the WTO's General Council. Among other things, the United States sought to highlight how China's trade-disruptive economic model works, the costs that it exacts from other WTO Members and the benefits that China receives from it. While these efforts raised awareness among WTO Members, they did not lead to meaningful changes in China's approach to the economy and trade.

In theory, the WTO membership could have adopted new rules expressly requiring members like China to abandon non-market economic systems and state-led, mercantilist trade regimes. For two basic reasons, however, Members have not pursued any negotiation of new WTO rules that would change China's problematic approach to the economy and trade in a meaningful way.

First, new WTO rules disciplining China would require agreement among all WTO Members, including China. China has shown no willingness at the WTO to consider fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime. Given the extent to which China has benefited and continues to benefit from the current state of affairs, it was not realistic to expect that China would agree to effective new WTO disciplines on its behavior. Indeed, China has been using its WTO membership to develop rapidly – albeit largely in an anticompetitive manner that comes at the expense of others. China is now the second largest economy in the world, and it is also the largest goods trader – and the largest exporter – among WTO Members. It is therefore highly unlikely that China would agree to new WTO disciplines targeted at its policies and practices. In fact, in connection with ongoing discussions at the WTO relating to needed WTO reform, China has stated that it would not alter its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

Second, China has a long record of not pursuing ambitious outcomes at the WTO. Past agreements, even relatively narrow ones, have been difficult to achieve, and even when an agreement is achieved, it is significantly less ambitious because of China's participation.

As these experiences make clear, it is unrealistic to believe that actions at the WTO alone will be sufficient to force or persuade China to make fundamental changes to its economic system or trade regime. The WTO's trading system was designed for countries that are truly committed to fair competition based on market principles, not for an economically powerful country determined to maintain a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, and China has demonstrated no willingness to change its approach in any meaningful way.


STRATEGIES OUTSIDE THE WTO

In recent years, it became evident to the United States that new strategies were needed to deal with the many problems generated by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, including solutions independent of the WTO. For example, in August 2017, the United States launched an investigation into China's acts, policies and practices relating to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974. The findings made in this investigation in March 2018 led to, among other things, substantial U.S. tariffs on imports from China as well as corresponding retaliation by China. Against this backdrop of rising tensions, in January 2020, the two sides signed what is commonly referred to as the "Phase One Agreement." This Agreement included commitments from China to improve market access for the agriculture and financial services sectors, along with commitments relating to intellectual property and technology transfer and a commitment by China to increase its purchases of U.S. goods and services.

Many of the commitments in the Phase One Agreement reflected changes that China had already been planning or pursuing for its own benefit or that otherwise served China's interests, such as the changes involving intellectual property protection and the opening up of more financial services sectors. Other commitments to which China agreed reflected a political calculation, as evidenced by the attention paid to the agriculture sector in the Phase One Agreement and the novel commitments relating to China's purchases of U.S. goods and services ostensibly as a means to reduce the bilateral trade deficit.

Given these dynamics, and given China's interest in a more stable relationship with the United States, China followed through in implementing some provisions of the Phase One Agreement. At the same time, China has not yet implemented some of the more significant commitments that it made in the Phase One Agreement, such as commitments in the area of agricultural biotechnology and the required risk assessment that China is to conduct relating to the use of ractopamine in cattle and swine. Intellectual property is another area where China still must take a number of actions to implement its commitments. In addition, China fell far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in 2020 and 2021.

The reality is that this Agreement did not meaningfully address the more fundamental concerns that the United States has with China's state-led, non-market policies and practices and their harmful impact on the U.S. economy and U.S. workers and businesses. China's government continues to employ extensive industrial policies of a kind not found in market economies. It provides substantial government guidance, massive financial resources and favorable regulatory support to domestic industries across the economy, often in pursuit of specific targets for capacity and production levels and dominant market shares. In furtherance of its industrial policy objectives, China's government has also limited market access for imported goods and services and restricted the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China. It has also used various, often illicit, means to secure foreign intellectual property and technology to further its industrial policy objectives.

The principal beneficiaries of these non-market policies and practices are China's state-owned and state-invested enterprises and numerous nominally private domestic companies. The benefits that Chinese industries receive largely come at the expense of China's trading partners, including their workers, businesses and consumers. As a result, markets all over the world have faced distorted signals, and the playing field is heavily skewed against foreign businesses that seek to compete against Chinese enterprises, whether in China, in the United States or globally.

The industrial policies that flow from China's predatory non-market economic system have systematically distorted critical sectors of the global economy such as steel, aluminum, solar and fisheries, devastating markets in the United States and other countries. At the same time, as is their design, China's industrial policies are increasingly responsible for displacing companies in new, emerging sectors of the global economy, as the Chinese government and the CCP powerfully intervene in these sectors on behalf of Chinese companies. Companies in economies disciplined by the market cannot effectively compete with both China's domestic companies and the Chinese state.


TODAY'S CHINA CHALLENGE

Like many other WTO Members, the United States expects, and seeks to ensure, that its trading partners' economic and trade regimes promote fair, market-oriented conditions for competition. Market orientation implies the freedom for enterprises and individuals to pursue their interests and goals on a level playing field. Indeed, in establishing the WTO, members agreed that "open, market-oriented policies" were at the foundation of the multilateral trading system.

In the case of China, more than two decades after its accession to the WTO, it has still not embraced a market-oriented approach to the economy and trade. Instead, unlike the market-oriented approaches found in the United States and other WTO Members, China continues to pursue a state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, which is decidedly predatory in nature. China heavily relies on market-distorting industrial plans covering virtually every sector of the economy, and these industrial plans are typically designed to provide substantial competitive advantages to Chinese enterprises and to impose substantial competitive disadvantages on competing foreign enterprises, as China seeks to secure dominant market shares for Chinese companies, both in China and globally.

Under China's approach, control and direction of all aspects of the economy is retained by the Chinese government and the CCP, facilitated by a reliance on rule by law rather than rule of law. The mere fact that decisions in the marketplace are often made based on the objectives of the state, rather than based on commercial considerations, distorts China's economy and, in turn, the global economy in ways that can damage and weaken the economies of China's trading partners. This damage is exacerbated by the overriding objective of the Chinese state's intervention in the market, which is to secure dominant positions for Chinese enterprises in numerous targeted industries. It is also exacerbated, of course, because China is the second largest economy in the world and the largest trader among WTO Members.

A host of harmful policies and practices currently emanate from China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime. Key examples include: numerous industrial plans that target specific industries for domination by Chinese enterprises; the placement of CCP officials in state-owned enterprises and private Chinese enterprises in order to control commercial decision making; massive and relentless subsidization of domestic industries (including financial support to and through state-owned enterprises and other state entities at multiple levels of government and a banking system dominated by state-owned banks favoring state-owned enterprises and targeted industries); discriminatory regulatory practices; investment and market access restrictions; import substitution; the creation and maintenance of persistent non-market excess capacity in industrial sectors; forced or pressured technology transfer; state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information; state-directed acquisitions of foreign companies with valuable technologies; continued gaps in intellectual property protection and enforcement; violations of internationally recognized labor rights (including forced labor); lax or unenforced environmental standards; increased adoption of unique Chinese national standards (including reportedly through the China Standards 2035 plan, which seeks to set the global standards for next-generation technologies); overly broad cybersecurity regulation designed to favor domestic companies; unwarranted data localization requirements and cross-border data transfer restrictions; the misuse of competition policy for industrial policy objectives; purposeful obfuscation of trade and economic policies, especially with regard to China's subsidization practices; and inadequate regulatory transparency.

As has become evident to the United States and China's other trading partners, one of the more problematic manifestations of China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime is the creation of non-market excess capacity – that is, capacity that would not have been created and would not persist if market forces were operating properly. In the past, China itself has acknowledged excess capacity in several industries, including steel, cement, electrolytic aluminum, flat glass and shipbuilding. Numerous other excess capacity industries have been identified by industry associations in the United States and other countries. Some of the Chinese industries most likely to inflict the disastrous consequences of severe excess capacity on the world in the future can be found in the Made in China 2025 industrial plan. Through that plan, the Chinese government is seeking to create dominant Chinese companies in 10 broad sectors, including advanced information technology, robotics and automated machine tools, aircraft and aircraft components, maritime vessels and marine engineering equipment, advanced rail equipment, new energy vehicles, electrical generation and transmission equipment, agricultural machinery, new materials and pharmaceuticals and medical devices. By some estimates, the Chinese government is making available more than $500 billion of financial support to these sectors, often using large government guidance funds that China attempts to shield from scrutiny by claiming that they are wholly private. Based on the recent history of the steel and aluminum industries, China's non-market distortions in these newer sectors will likely result in oversupply, leading to loss of jobs and production in market economies and, in some cases, less choice, lower quality, less innovation and higher prices for consumers over time.

Another example of the harm that can be caused by China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime involves forced or pressured technology transfer. In USTR's Section 301 investigation into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation, USTR issued two extensive factual reports that detailed how the Chinese government uses foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal joint venture requirements, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. The reports also explained how China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. In addition, the reports analyzed how the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese entities to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by the state's industrial plans. Finally, the reports illustrated how the Chinese government has conducted or supported cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, with the targets being intellectual property and sensitive commercial information held by U.S. firms. While these reports focused on the harm caused to U.S. interests, it is not a problem borne solely by the United States. As in the case of non-market excess capacity, China's unfair policies and practices relating to forced or pressured technology transfer also affect other WTO Members whose companies have developed or are developing advanced technologies.

Closely related to its pursuit of forced or pressured technology transfer, China also sponsors and engages in the theft of intellectual property rights, trade secrets and confidential business information for commercial use. As noted earlier in the report, intelligence and law enforcement officials from the Five Eyes countries – Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States – have publicly characterized the Chinese state's sponsorship and pursuit of this type of theft as being on a scale unprecedented in human history. In the United States alone, in 2023, there were approximately 2,000 active investigations into apparent Chinese theft covering a diverse array of U.S. industries, from aviation to biotechnology to robotics, among many others.

In addition to non-market excess capacity, forced or pressured technology transfer and state-sponsorship of the theft of intellectual property rights, trade secrets and confidential business information, China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime also causes serious harm to industries, companies and workers in the United States and other WTO Members in other ways. For example, Chinese companies use the artificial competitive advantages provided to them by the extensive interventionist policies and practices of the Chinese state to undersell their foreign competition, both in China and around the world. To some extent, the harm to foreign manufacturers is reflected in the very large number of antidumping and countervailing duty investigations that have been initiated against China by the investigating authorities of WTO Members. Since China joined the WTO in 2001, it has been the number one target for both antidumping and countervailing duty investigations. At the same time, many types of interventionist policies and practices are not capable of being addressed by antidumping and countervailing duty regimes, so the harm caused by China is only partially reflected in those antidumping and countervailing duty investigations.

In sum, China's approach to the economy and trade has not moved toward a stronger embrace of open, market-oriented principles and instead has seen a doubling-down on state capitalism "with Chinese characteristics." The state remains in control of China's economy, and it heavily intervenes in the market to achieve China's industrial policy objectives, which typically target industries for domination by Chinese companies. Along the way, the state subsidizes industries that would not otherwise form or thrive, directs activities that a private business would not choose to undertake and seeks access to foreign technologies often through nefarious ways, among many other problematic policies and practices.

The evidence is clear, moreover, that when a trading partner with China's size – China is the second largest economy in the world and the largest goods trader among WTO Members – routinely pursues these types of non-market policies and practices, the distortions that it creates impose substantial costs on its trading partners. The Chinese state's decisions in the marketplace are not driven by market factors, but their effects on markets push U.S. and international companies out of sectors, such as steel, aluminum, solar panels and fisheries. Once China's dominance is established, barriers to entry can lock-in China's dominance over the long term. As a result, markets all over the world are less fair and well-functioning than they should be, and the playing field is heavily skewed against U.S. and other foreign companies that seek to compete against Chinese companies, whether in China's market or markets outside of China.

In the United States, it is widely accepted that the existing WTO rules do not, and cannot, effectively discipline many of China's most harmful policies and practices. It is similarly evident to us that China has become quite adept at circumventing the existing rules, as well as the attempted enforcement of those rules, by obscuring state involvement in the economy in ways that the WTO rules did not anticipate at the time of their negotiation. These problems are exacerbated by China's long record of flouting the transparency obligations that it undertook when it joined the WTO. At the same time, there is no expectation that China would agree to new WTO rules disciplining its problematic behavior. As a result, in the United States' view, while the WTO still has a significant role to play, enforcement of WTO rules has become less significant and solutions independent of the WTO are necessary, including solutions pursued through bilateral engagement and the use of domestic trade tools, to counter the harm caused by China's unfair and anticompetitive policies and practices.

In recent years, it has become apparent that the views of other WTO Members have also been evolving toward the United States' view regarding the limits of the WTO when it comes to addressing the China challenge. While the WTO remains a strong focus for the United States and many of the United States' trading partners, there is a growing awareness that it may be necessary to pursue solutions outside the WTO in order to avoid the severe harm that will likely continue to result from China's predatory non-market economic and trade regime. For example, some of the United States' trading partners are now exploring or adopting possible new domestic trade tools to address the challenges posed by China's state-led trade regime. These and other like-minded trading partners have also begun working with the United States ― sometimes confidentially ― in pursuit of new joint strategies to address China's harmful non-market policies and practices. Many of these same trading partners have also intensified their work on deterring and responding to China's increasing use of economic coercion, including through joint and coordinated strategies.

It is also noteworthy that, in recent years, many of China's trading partners have also become increasingly skeptical of China's rhetoric. For example, China often touts its strong commitment to win-win outcomes in international trade matters, but its actions plainly belie its words. Through state-led industrial plans like Made in China 2025, which targets 10 strategic emerging sectors, China pursues a zero-sum approach. It first seeks to develop and dominate its domestic markets. Once China develops, acquires or steals new technologies and Chinese enterprises become capable of producing the same quality products in those industries as the foreign competition, the state suppresses the foreign competition domestically and then supports Chinese enterprises as they "go out" and seek dominant positions in global markets. Countries with industries like steel, aluminum, solar panels and fisheries have experienced this reality, and they know that a new wave of severe and persistent non-market excess capacity can be expected in industries like those targeted by Made in China 2025, to the detriment of China's trading partners.

As China's economy grew over the years since its accession to the WTO, every country in the world has witnessed China become a regular user of economic coercion, directed not only against foreign companies but also increasingly foreign governments, including in democratic countries. Indeed, China no longer hesitates to take on foreign governments whose policies or practices are perceived to undermine either China's economic and trade interests or China's political interests. China's coercive economic measures in this context have taken a variety of forms, including, for example, import restrictions, export restrictions, restrictions on bilateral investment, regulatory actions, state-led and state-encouraged boycotts, and travel bans. Many countries have been directly subjected to this economic coercion. At the same time, one intended by-product of this economic coercion is broader in scope, as China seeks to create an environment that mutes international objections to China's non-market policies and practices, even when China blatantly flouts the WTO's rules-based international trading system.

Finally, it has also not gone unnoticed among China's trading partners ― particularly the democratic market economies ― that China's leadership appears confident in its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade and feels no need to conform to global norms. China's leadership also demonstrates confidence in its ability to quiet dissenting voices. Indeed, it has become increasingly evident that China's leadership is seeking to establish new global norms that better reflect and support not only China's approach to the economy and trade but also China's governance model, providing a potentially attractive alternative for other authoritarian regimes around the world.

In sum, the reality confronting the United States and other WTO Members is not simply that China has chosen to pursue an economic and trade regime that conflicts in significant and harmful ways with the market-oriented approach endorsed by the WTO membership, to the detriment of our workers and businesses. China also does not hold the same core values as other WTO members, especially the democratic market economies. China plainly does not embrace our core values, which, like the fundamental principles of the WTO, include openness, fair competition, non-discrimination, reciprocity and transparency as well as adherence to the rule of law.


U.S. TRADE POLICY TOWARD CHINA

As a starting point, any U.S. trade policy toward China must account for current realities in the U.S.-China trade relationship and the many problems that China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade creates for the United States and other trading partners, both now and likely in the future. Given that China's problematic approach has evolved and become more sophisticated, our strategies also need to evolve and become more sophisticated. We also need to find ways to address ― and to protect ourselves against ― the many non-market policies and practices routinely generated by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. Those policies and practices directly harm American workers, farmers, businesses and consumers, threaten our technological edge, weaken the resiliency of our supply chains and undermine our national interest. They also inflict similar harms on many of our trading partners.

Given these circumstances, it is clear that any strategic approach pursued by the United States must focus not only on the near-term, but also on the longer term, if the United States is to compete effectively with China and build resilience against the harms caused by China's predatory behavior. Any strategic approach should also be pursued in coordination with our many important, like-minded trading partners around the world.

Looking back over the first 22 years of China's WTO membership, and observing China's current leadership and clear policy direction, it would be appropriate to assume that the problems currently created by China will be with us for some time. We cannot expect that China will willingly make fundamental changes to its state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade in the near-term or even the medium-term.

It is also clear that effective strategies for dealing with China need to be flexible. The United States must be prepared to adapt and adjust its strategic approach over time as China's non-market policies and practices evolve and as global trade patterns shift and alliances and interests change.

For all of these reasons, the United States is now pursuing a multi-faceted strategic approach as it seeks to address the China challenge. This approach involves the pursuit of strategic domestic investment, bilateral engagement of China, enforcement actions, the deployment of domestic trade tools and close coordination with allies and partners.


DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

The United States has been working to ensure that we are taking the steps domestically to invest in, and build policies supportive of, the industries of today and tomorrow. We therefore have been working to strengthen our economy, our supply chains, our infrastructure, our workers, our farmers and our businesses and to lay a solid foundation for us to continue to innovate and maintain our technological edge. Important steps taken to date include the passage of the CHIPS and Science Act, the Inflation Reduction Act and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as well as the many subsequent efforts to implement those Acts.


BILATERAL ENGAGEMENT

The United States continues to pursue bilateral engagement with China. China is an important trading partner, and every avenue for obtaining real change in its approach to the economy and trade must be utilized.

The United States' focus is on addressing the most fundamental problems emanating from China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade, rather than seeking isolated, incremental changes in China's trade policies and practices. Of particular concern are China's industrial plans, which target specific industries for dominance and are pursued through a wide array of non-market policies and practices, such as discriminatory regulation, forced or pressured technology transfer, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, the non-market activities of state-owned and state-invested enterprises, massive, unrelenting and often non-transparent subsidization, market access restrictions and repression of internationally recognized labor rights, including the use of forced labor, among other harmful policies and practices. China's increasing use of economic coercion is another significant concern.

At the same time, it is clear that prior U.S. efforts have not led to fundamental changes in China's approach to the economy and trade. Ultimately, it will be up to China to decide whether and to what extent it is willing to work constructively with the United States to address these significant concerns.


ENFORCEMENT

It is important for the bilateral relationship to demonstrate that China must honor its promises. We therefore have been working to ensure that China lives up to its existing trade commitments, including its WTO commitments and the ones that China made in the Phase One Agreement.


DOMESTIC TRADE TOOLS

The use of domestic trade tools is also a key focus of U.S. trade policy toward China. To the extent that China's unfair, non-market and distortive policies and practices persist, the United States is prepared to use domestic trade tools strategically as needed in order to achieve a more level playing field with China for U.S. workers and businesses.

It is also apparent that existing trade tools need to be strengthened, and new trade tools need to be forged. China pursues unfair policies and practices that were not contemplated when many of the U.S. trade statutes were drafted decades ago, and we are therefore exploring ways in which to work with the Congress to update our trade tools to counter them.

In one significant action to date, as previously discussed, USTR pursued an investigation under the authority of Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation. In March 2018, after a thorough review and analysis of the evidence, USTR issued a detailed report, finding that China had engaged in a range of unfair and harmful conduct:

First, USTR found that China uses foreign ownership restrictions, including joint venture requirements, equity limitations and other investment restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from U.S. companies to Chinese entities. USTR also found that China uses administrative review and licensing procedures to require or pressure technology transfer, which, inter alia, undermines the value of U.S. investments and technology and weakens the global competitiveness of U.S. companies.

Second, USTR found that China imposes substantial restrictions on, and intervenes in, U.S. companies' investments and activities, including through restrictions on technology licensing terms. These restrictions deprive U.S. technology owners of the ability to bargain and set market-based terms for technology transfer. As a result, U.S. companies seeking to license technologies must do so on terms that unfairly favor Chinese recipients.

Third, USTR found that China directs and facilitates the systematic investment in, and acquisition of, U.S. companies and assets by Chinese companies to obtain cutting-edge technologies and intellectual property and to generate large-scale technology transfer in industries deemed important by Chinese government industrial plans.

Fourth, USTR found that China conducts and supports unauthorized intrusions into, and theft from, the computer networks of U.S. companies. These actions provide the Chinese government with unauthorized access to intellectual property, trade secrets and confidential business information, such as technical data, negotiating positions and sensitive and proprietary internal business communications. The purpose of these actions is to support China's strategic development goals, including its science and technology advancement, military modernization and economic development.

Based on these findings, the United States took a range of responsive actions. These actions included the successful prosecution of a WTO dispute settlement case challenging Chinese measures that deny foreign patent holders the ability to enforce their patent rights against a Chinese joint venture partner after a technology transfer contract ends and that impose mandatory adverse contract terms that discriminate against and are less favorable for imported foreign technology as compared to Chinese technology, as well as the imposition of substantial additional tariffs on imports of Chinese goods. Over time, as has been previously reported, these tariffs eventually covered $370 billion of Chinese imports, with additional tariffs of 25 percent on $250 billion of Chinese imports and additional tariffs of 15 percent on a further $120 billion of Chinese imports, while China responded through the imposition of retaliatory tariffs on various imports of U.S. goods.

In December 2019, after one year of negotiations, the United States announced that the two sides had finalized the text of an economic and trade agreement, which was later signed in January 2020. This agreement, commonly referred to as the "Phase One Agreement," included commitments from China on intellectual property, technology transfer, agriculture, financial services, currency and foreign exchange, and the purchase of U.S. goods and services. The commitments varied in ambition, and in effectiveness. For example, some commitments related to financial services reflected reforms that China was already contemplating or pursuing, as China had begun easing foreign investment restrictions in some financial services sectors in 2017. In addition, in the area of intellectual property rights, while China committed to make a number of changes to its laws and regulations, China saw many of these changes as now needed by its domestic businesses, given their own increasing efforts at innovation. It also remains unclear how faithfully and fairly China will actually enforce the changes to its laws and regulations. Meanwhile, other commitments that China made, such as in the area of technology transfer, are difficult to verify given the tactics that China takes to obscure its activities.

Notably, the Phase One Agreement did not address many of the U.S. concerns that the United States had been seeking to address in its negotiations with China. The unresolved issues included critical concerns in areas such as industrial plans, subsidies, state-owned enterprises, excess capacity, state-sponsored theft of intellectual property, standards, cybersecurity, data localization requirements, restrictions on cross-border data transfers, competition law enforcement and regulatory transparency as well as certain issues in the areas of intellectual property, technology transfer and services market access that were not addressed in the Phase One Agreement.

In light of the limited progress represented by the Phase One Agreement, the United States did not make major changes to the existing Section 301 tariffs. After some minor adjustments, the United States kept in place tariffs on $370 billion of Chinese imports, which included 25 percent tariffs on $250 billion of Chinese imports and 7.5 percent tariffs on $120 billion of Chinese imports. The United States also decided not to move forward with plans to raise the tariff rate for some of the existing Section 301 tariffs or to impose new tariffs on additional Chinese imports.

Since the Phase One Agreement entered into force in February 2020, the United States has been closely monitoring China's progress in implementing its commitments. The United States has also been utilizing the consultation arrangements set forth in the agreement, including regular meetings required by the agreement between the two sides. Through these many engagements, the United States has raised various concerns that have arisen regarding China's implementation progress. In addition, official trade data appears to show that China fell far short of implementing its commitments to purchase U.S. goods and services in calendar years 2020 and 2021. Serious concerns with China's implementation efforts have also arisen in other areas, including intellectual property rights, where the implementation of several commitments has been proceeding slowly, and agriculture, particularly with regard to China's commitments relating to agricultural biotechnology, the risk assessment that China is required to conduct relating to the use of ractopamine in cattle and swine, the registration of U.S. food facilities and trade in U.S. poultry products.

In 2024, USTR expects to complete a statutorily mandated four-year review of the tariffs that had been imposed on Chinese imports as a result of the Section 301 investigation into China's unfair acts, policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property and innovation. As part of this review, USTR is examining the effectiveness of the tariff actions in achieving the objectives of the original investigation, other actions that could be taken and the effects of those actions on the United States economy, including consumers.


ALLIES AND PARTNERS

Despite the size of the U.S. economy, the United States cannot do it alone. There are limits to bilateral engagement and the impact of enforcement actions and domestic trade tools. That is why the United States is working more intensely and broadly with allies and partners. Just as we are reassessing our domestic trade tools, we are also re-thinking how the United States can coordinate with its trading partners to address the challenges that China poses for the global economy.

As more and more U.S. allies and partners come to understand the need for new approaches for dealing with China and its non-market policies and practices, the United States is working more intensely and broadly with them, both in existing international trade fora and initiatives and in new ones. The COVID-19 pandemic, followed by Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, and their impacts on supply chains and global economic conditions, have laid bare the vulnerabilities and interdependencies of economies around the world and have underscored the need to build up economic security and resiliency across sectors. The concentration of supply chains in China is a particular problem, especially in light of the many serious risks and potential harms that emanate from China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. There is a strong need for new thinking and new coalitions of allies and partners, including not only on a bilateral basis ― especially with major trading partners ― but also regionally and multilaterally, to find global solutions to the many serious problems posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade.

For example, the United States and the European Union (EU) have established a Trade and Technology Council, and the United States and Japan have established a Partnership for Trade. In both venues, one important component of the engagement focuses on better understanding and developing strategies for addressing non-market policies and practices.

Notably, as a result of meetings of the Trade and Technology Council, the United States and the EU have been discussing and exploring possible coordinated actions to address China's non-market policies and practices in the medical devices sector and in the clean energy sector. The two sides have also been exchanging information on China's extensive use of government guidance funds, which provide large amounts of financial support to Chinese companies, and on non-market excess capacity in the legacy semiconductor chips sector. In addition, the two sides have expressed serious concerns regarding China's use of economic coercion, including against allies and partners of the United States and the EU, and resolved to cooperate on strategies for addressing this problem.

Separately, in 2022, the United States and the EU held the first Ministerial Meeting of the Working Group on Large Civil Aircraft. Since then, the two sides have met regularly at the working level to explore strategies for confronting the challenges posed by China's non-market policies and practices in the aviation sector.

Over the past two years, the United States, the EU and Japan have also begun to deepen their trilateral work, focusing on the identification of problems arising from non-market policies and practices, including in sectors such as legacy semiconductor chips. The three trading partners have also sought to identify gaps in existing trade tools and where further work is needed to develop new trade tools to address non-market policies and practices, as well as possible cooperation in utilizing existing tools. The three trading partners have also highlighted the importance of WTO reform in an effort to build a free and fair rules-based multilateral trading system that benefits all its members and helps secure shared prosperity for all.

The United States is also holding discussions with many other like-minded trading partners, including in the Indo-Pacific region, on how to strengthen our existing trade relationships. Given that trade with China poses so many serious risks and potential harms, the United States believes that market economies should enhance their trade with each other.

As part of its discussions with like-minded trading partners, the United States is also working to make critical supply chains less vulnerable and more secure, sustainable and resilient. The United States recognizes the need to cooperate with trading partners to diversify international suppliers and reduce geographic concentration risk, especially in China, and to address vulnerabilities that can result in shortages of key goods. This joint work can also enable more effective responses to non-market policies and practices that have eroded critical supply chains. Reducing geographic concentration also reduces opportunities for economic coercion while contributing to a more stable and secure trading environment.

At the same time, the United States is continuing to pursue initiatives at the WTO. For example, the U.S. agenda at the WTO includes pushing for and building support for meaningful WTO reforms to update the organization and respond to contemporary challenges, including those posed by China's state-led, non-market approach to the economy and trade. One U.S. proposal relates to "special and differential treatment," where certain WTO Members rely on self-declared developing country status to inappropriately seek "special and differential treatment" to avoid making meaningful commitments in WTO negotiations. The United States has also offered, and will continue to pursue, a proposal intended to increase consequences for WTO Members who fail to adequately notify industrial subsidies. More recently, in connection with the WTO's upcoming 13th Ministerial Conference, the United States has been advocating for the establishment of a work stream broadly focused on state intervention, including an analysis of gaps in existing WTO rules to discipline it.

Similar work is taking place in fora such as the Group of Seven (G7), the Group of Twenty (G20) and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). For example, at the G7 Leaders Meeting, held in June 2022, the United States and the other members of the G7 discussed the challenges that China's non-market policies and practices pose to the multilateral trading system. They determined to continue to build a shared understanding of this problem and to consult on collective approaches for addressing it. They also specifically committed to work together to develop coordinated actions to ensure a level playing field, to counter economic coercion and to reduce strategic dependencies. Subsequently, in May 2023, the G7 Leaders decided to launch the Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion. In addition, in October 2023, the G7 trade ministers issued a statement reaffirming their shared concerns regarding a wide and evolving range of non-market policies and practices, particularly when they are an integral part of comprehensive strategies to pursue global market dominance. The statement also highlighted the fact that non-market policies and practices distort competition and lead to unfair trade and have a particularly negative impact on industrial development in emerging and developing economies.