5. People's Republic of China

Overview

Our China trade policy goals have been to open China's markets to American exports, support Chinese domestic economic reform, and integrate China into the Pacific and world economies. We have used a variety of means to achieve these goals, including commercially meaningful agreements that create opportunities for Americans. These efforts culminated in the accession of China to the WTO in December 2001, which followed the formal approval of China's accession agreement by WTO Ministers at Doha, Qatar, in November 2001, ending 15 years of often intense and difficult negotiations in which the United States had taken a leading role among WTO members.

To realize the full benefits of China's WTO accession requires extensive monitoring and enforcement. We have put into place a comprehensive interagency monitoring effort and are prepared to use our trade laws to secure compliance, where necessary. China's status as a WTO member will provide new means and focus for U.S. efforts. We will benefit from the multilateral monitoring efforts mandated by China's terms of accession through which we will be able to work with 142 other WTO members instead of acting alone when addressing compliance problems. We can also use WTO dispute settlement where necessary.

2001 Activities

In 2001, the United States played a key role in negotiating the multilateral portion of China's WTO accession, achieving important concessions in areas of interest to U.S. firms. Upon China's accession, an expert group was formed under the TPSC in Washington and a WTO Coordination Committee was established within the Mission in Beijing to monitor China's implementation of its commitments. The Departments of Commerce and State continued to devote considerable resources to building an understanding among the Chinese of China's WTO obligations.

China's accession to the WTO in December 2001 was facilitated by two key events, the historic U.S.-China bilateral market access agreement reached in November 1999 and the subsequent enactment in October 2000 of legislation permitting the grant of permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China. Building upon a record of bipartisan Congressional support for a market-opening China trade policy, the PNTR legislation authorized the President to terminate application of Section 402 of the 1974 Trade Act (the Jackson-Vanik Amendment), which had mandated annual reviews of China's receipt of normal trade relations treatment, and to grant China PNTR treatment if the President could certify that the final terms of China's accession were at least equivalent to those agreed bilaterally between the United States and China in November 1999. The President issued his report on certification in November 2001, and his subsequent proclamation granting PNTR status to China became effective January 1, 2002.

a. WTO Accession

i. Background

In July of 1986, China applied for admission to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1947). The GATT formed a Working Party in March of 1987, composed of all interested GATT contracting parties, to examine China's application and negotiate terms for China's accession. For the next eight years, negotiations were conducted under the auspices of the GATT Working Party. Following the formation of the WTO on January 1, 1995, a WTO Working Party, composed of all interested WTO members, took over the negotiations.

Like all GATT and WTO accession negotiations, the negotiations with China had three basic aspects. First, China provided information to the Working Party regarding its trade regime. China also updated this information periodically during the 15 years of negotiations to reflect changes in its trade regime. Second, each interested WTO member negotiated bilaterally with China regarding market access concessions and commitments in the goods and services areas, including, for example, the tariffs on industrial and agricultural goods and the commitments that China is making to open up its market to foreign services suppliers. The most trade liberalizing of the concessions and commitments obtained through these bilateral negotiations were consolidated into China's Goods and Services Schedules and now apply to all WTO members. Third, overlapping in time with these bilateral negotiations, China engaged in multilateral negotiations with Working Party members on the rules that govern trade with China. The rules commitments made by China in this area are set forth in its Protocol of Accession and an accompanying Report of the Working Party.

With its accession to the WTO, China is implementing significant changes to its trade regime, at all levels of government. Although it has been gradually transitioning toward a market economy from what had been a strict command economy two decades ago, China has now taken on the far-reaching obligations of the WTO, a rules-based system that requires its members to operate with openness and transparency and stresses the central role of markets and private enterprise.

In order to accede to the WTO, China has committed to undertake important systemic reforms, which should facilitate business dealings. China has also committed to take concrete steps to remove trade barriers and open its markets to foreign companies and their exports from the first day of accession in virtually every product sector and for a wide range of services. Supporting these steps, China has also committed to eliminate or significantly reduce restrictions on the rights of foreign companies to import and export goods and to distribute goods within China, and it has further committed to rectify numerous trade-distortive industrial and agricultural policies.

The openness, accountability and changes required by China's commitments should strengthen and accelerate the achievement of China's economic reform goals. China's ministries and agencies will transition out of their old role of directing and controlling how and with whom Chinese enterprises do business. Increasingly, they will need to focus on the implementation and enforcement of laws, regulations and other measures that will help to promote the smooth functioning of markets. Meanwhile, State-owned enterprises will face greater accountability for their business decisions, and together with other Chinese enterprises they will face the full forces of global competition for the first time.

ii. Systemic Reforms

China committed to implementing broad reforms in the areas of transparency, notice and comment, uniform application of laws and judicial review. Each of these reforms will strengthen the rule of law in China and help to address practices that have made it difficult for U.S. and other foreign companies to do business in China.

iii. Adherence to Existing Multilateral WTO Agreements

As a WTO member, China assumes the obligations of more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements covering all areas of trade, with only minimal transition periods, where necessary. Consequently, China will be taking on the obligations of the GATT, the WTO agreement that lays down core principles, such as non-discrimination and national treatment, that constrain and guide national trade policies as well as other WTO agreements, such as those governing agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, technical barriers to trade, trade-related investment measures (TRIMS), trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPS), services (GATS), subsidies, import licensing, rules of origin, customs valuation and preshipment inspection.

iv. China-Specific Trade-Liberalizing Commitments

China's accession agreement also includes numerous China-specific trade-liberalizing commitments. One of the most significant of these commitments involves trading rights. Prior to its accession, China restricted the number of companies with trading rights, i.e, the right to import and export goods, and the products that a particular company can import or export. China agreed to phase-in trading rights, so that all enterprises in China and all foreign enterprises and individuals will have full trading rights within three years after accession.

Perhaps equally significant is China's commitment regarding distribution services. Prior to its accession, China generally did not permit foreign companies to distribute products through wholesale and retail systems in China or to provide related distribution services, such as repair and maintenance services. China agreed to phase-out these prohibitions over three years, subject to limited exceptions.

China also committed to the phase-out of trade-distortive non-tariff measures (NTMs), such as quotas and licenses, covering hundreds of products. Most of these NTMs must be eliminated upon accession, while the remainder of them must be eliminated within three years after accession.

China further committed to the elimination of import monopolies maintained by State trading enterprises in China on many industrial goods upon accession. It must also provide full information on the pricing mechanisms of state trading enterprises, to limit the mark-up on goods that they import in order to avoid trade distortions and otherwise to ensure that their import purchasing procedures are transparent and fully in compliance with WTO rules.

China's accession agreement includes many provisions directly or indirectly addressing state-owned enterprises. China agreed that laws, regulations and other measures relating to the purchase and commercial sale and production of goods or supply of services for commercial sale by state-owned enterprises or for use in non-governmental purposes are subject to WTO rules. China also agreed that state-owned enterprises must make purchases and sales based solely on commercial considerations, such as price, quality, marketability and availability, and that the government will not influence the commercial decisions of state-owned enterprises.

In an annex to its accession agreement, China provided detailed information on the limited number of products and services subject to price control or government guidance pricing and the procedures for establishing prices. China may not use price controls to restrict the level of imports of goods or services.

Finally, China committed to non-discrimination in the treatment of enterprises within its special economic areas.

v. Tariff Reductions

When China's Goods Schedule went into effect shortly after China acceded to the WTO, greatly increased market access was realized by U.S. and other foreign companies through cuts in China's tariffs on industrial and agricultural goods. Although these reductions generally take place over a period of five years, in almost all instances most of the reductions took place immediately on January 1, 2002.

Tariffs on industrial goods of greatest importance to U.S. businesses were reduced from a base average of 25 percent (in 1997) to 7 percent. More specifically, China agreed to participate in the Information Technology Agreement, which requires the elimination of tariffs on computers, semiconductors and other information technology products. China's elimination of these tariffs will be completed by January 1, 2005. China also agreed to implement tariff reductions on more than two-thirds of the 1,100-plus products covered by the WTO's Chemical Tariff Harmonization Agreement. In addition, tariffs on autos were to be reduced from 80-100 percent to 25 percent (by July 1, 2006), and tariffs on auto parts were to be reduced from a base average of 23 percent to 9.5 percent (by January 1, 2006). Tariffs in the wood and paper sectors were to be reduced from a 1997 average of 18 percent on wood and 15-25 percent on paper to 5 percent and 7.5 percent, respectively.

Tariffs on agricultural goods of greatest importance to U.S. farmers were to be reduced from a 1997 average of 31 percent to 14 percent.

vi. Services Commitments

As set forth in China's Services Schedule, China committed to the substantial opening of a broad range of services sectors through the elimination of many existing limitations on market access, at all levels of government, particularly in sectors of importance to the United States, such as banking, insurance, telecommunications and professional services. Notably, these commitments represent only the minimum level of market access that China will be expected to make available once it becomes a WTO member. Nothing in China's Services Schedule precludes the Chinese government from applying more liberal measures that would allow foreign companies to provide services with even fewer limitations on market access.

vii. Enforceability

WTO members established a multilateral review mechanism at the WTO of unprecedented scope and authority. This so-called "Transitional Review Mechanism" operates annually for 8 years after China's accession, with a final review in year 10. It requires China to provide detailed information, to report to Washington on its implementation efforts, and to give all WTO members the opportunity to raise questions, in a multilateral setting, about how China is complying with its commitments before 16 subsidiary WTO bodies, which report to the WTO's General Council. The General Council then conducts an overall review each year and may issue recommendations.

Normal WTO dispute settlement procedures remain available to enforce all of the rights of the United States and other WTO members under the WTO agreements, including with regard to the commitments in China's accession agreement.

viii. Safeguard Mechanisms

Even though the terms of China's accession agreement are directed at the opening of China's market to WTO members' industries, China's accession agreement also includes several safeguard mechanisms designed to prevent injury that U.S. or other WTO members' industries and workers might experience based on unfair trade practices or import surges.

For 15 years after China's accession to the WTO, the United States and certain other WTO members will continue to have the ability to utilize a special non-market economy methodology for measuring dumping in anti-dumping cases against Chinese companies

China's accession agreement also includes a unique, China-specific safeguard provision allowing a WTO member to restrain increasing Chinese imports that disrupt its market. This mechanism applies to all industrial and agricultural products and will be available for 12 years after accession.

Additionally, the accession agreement includes a special textiles safeguard, which will be available for 7 years after accession (until December 31, 2008). This safeguard covers all products subject to the WTO Agreement on Textiles and Clothing as of January 1, 1995.

Finally, the United States (and other WTO members) will continue to have the rights under WTO rules to maintain, for example, its export control policies and to prevent the import of Chinese goods made with prison labor.

ix. U.S. Monitoring and Enforcement Efforts

Given China's importance as a major trading power and the breadth and complexity of China's WTO commitments, the U.S. Government initiated a comprehensive and coordinated interagency monitoring effort to ensure that China complies with its commitments. As part of this effort, the U.S. Government will be active on several fronts. In China, State Department economic officers, Foreign Commercial Service officers, Foreign Agricultural Service officers and Customs attaches will gather information and work with U.S. companies and assist them in doing business in China. In Washington, an interagency team of experts, led by USTR, drawing on the assistance of the U.S. Government personnel in China as well as trade associations, chambers of commerce, industry and agriculture groups and individual companies, will closely monitor China's compliance efforts. In Geneva, USTR and other concerned agencies will also be active participants in the WTO's annual Transitional Review Mechanism.

Where the U.S. Government finds systemic problems and potential WTO violations, it will act quickly to resolve them through all available mechanisms. It will use bilateral means, including U.S. trade laws, the WTO's multilateral Transitional Review Mechanism and WTO dispute settlement proceedings, as necessary. This effort will be greatly enhanced by the placement of overseas trade compliance officers from the Commerce Department and other agencies in our embassies in key trading partners.

b. Agriculture

China's WTO membership is a huge step forward for the U.S. agricultural community in its long sought objective to gain direct access to China's market for U.S. agricultural products and, in particular, its aim to remove China's remaining unjustified sanitary and phytosanitary barriers.

Previously, in 1992, China signed a bilateral Memorandum of Understanding on Market Access with the United States, agreeing to remove unjustified technical barriers to imports of U.S. agricultural commodities. Although China agreed to address these issues within one year, access issues for several products remains limited.

On April 10, 1999, just months before finalizing their November 1999 bilateral WTO agreement, the United States and China signed an Agreement on U.S. - China Agricultural Cooperation (ACA), which eliminated technical barriers in China to imports of U.S. citrus, meat and poultry, wheat, and other grains. The signing of this agreement facilitated and greatly enhanced the strong positive support for PNTR by the agricultural community. While trade to China has increased for U.S. citrus, grains, red meat and poultry under the 1999 ACA, China's compliance with this agreement has been inconsistent and U.S. exporters still do not have the access envisioned in the agreement. While China agreed to recognize the U.S. inspection system for meat and poultry, for example, it has erected new barriers to poultry imports with new regulations (issued December 1, 2000), which it eventually revised and republished in February 2001. China's regulatory stance on poultry was primarily intended to deal with a long-standing smuggling problem. But, the result was to impose confusion and raise concerns among traders. Most recently, in late 2001, China insisted that imported U.S. chicken paws carry a "Certificate of Wholesomeness" declaring them to have been inspected and found fit for human consumption by the Food Safety and Inspection Service, requiring the U.S. poultry industry to modify processing plant operations.

In the 1999 ACA, China also agreed to remove phytosanitary barriers to citrus exports from Arizona, California, Florida and Texas over a two-year phase-in period. While it implemented the first tranche on schedule, China delayed implementation for remaining counties in California and Florida three months beyond the October 2000 deadline, finally implementing the agreement for those counties on January 18, 2001. China has not responded to the February 2001 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's request to add five more counties (one in California and four in Florida) to the export list for China.

China also agreed to remove phytosanitary barriers to wheat and other grains from the Pacific Northwest beginning April 1999. In marketing year 2000/2001, wheat shipments from the Pacific Northwest totaled 233,000 tons, but China periodically detained U.S. wheat shipments, subjecting them to unwarranted special handling requirements and other actions not consistent with the ACA. As of November 2001, 142,000 tons of sales have been made, 120,000 tons of which have already been exported. No U.S. wheat is currently detained.

Bilateral negotiations on remaining sanitary and phytosanitary issues continue, with barriers still in place on plums, additional varieties of apples, potatoes and pears.

With its accession to the WTO, China took on the obligations of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. China also made several additional commitments that will help to rectify numerous agricultural policies upon accession or after limited transition periods. For example, China committed to eliminate export subsidies upon accession, and it has agreed to a cap for trade and production-distorting domestic subsidies that is lower than the cap permitted developing countries and that includes the same elements that developed countries use in determining whether the cap has been reached. In addition, China committed to implement tariff-rate quotas that provide significant market access for bulk goods of special importance to American farmers such as grains, soy oil and cotton upon accession. China also agreed to eliminate import monopolies maintained by State trading enterprises on agricultural goods such as wheat, rice and corn and to permit non-State trading enterprises to import them.

c. Intellectual Property Rights

For more than a decade, the United States and China have engaged in detailed discussions regarding the improvement of China's protection of intellectual property rights and market access for products with intellectual property rights protection. In January 1992, the United States and China reached an agreement on improved protection for U.S. inventions and copyrighted works, including computer software and sound recordings, trademarks, and trade secrets. This Agreement focused principally on revisions to China's laws and membership in international intellectual property rights agreements, including the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, the Universal Copyright Convention, the Geneva Phonogram Convention, the Patent Cooperation Treaty, and the Madrid Protocol on the Protection of Marks.

Although China improved the legal framework for intellectual property rights protection based on the 1992 bilateral agreement, enforcement of those laws was seriously deficient. In 1995, the United States and China reached a second agreement that focused on intellectual property rights enforcement and market access issues.

Based on our 1995 IPR Agreement and the Administration's continuing bilateral efforts, China has developed a basic infrastructure for the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights. Implementation of our bilateral intellectual property rights agreements provided a basis for China's commitment to implement the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) upon accession to the WTO. Additional improvements to China's laws and training of judges and enforcement personnel are essential. U.S. and Chinese rights-holders can seek administrative and judicial remedies for infringement of their intellectual property rights; however, administrative sanctions need to be increased and the threshold to initiate criminal investigations needs to be lowered. China has formally issued a decree to address the "end-user" computer software piracy issue in connection with government purchase and use of legitimate software.

As a result of intensive bilateral implementation and enforcement negotiations in 1996, China has made further progress on enforcement of intellectual property rights. For example, Chinese authorities have shut down over 100 illegal CD, CD-ROM and VCD production facilities. This effort has changed China from an exporter of pirated material to being the import target for pirated product from other countries in the region. China also is improving customs enforcement of intellectual property rights. Each year customs authorities seize millions of pirated CDs, CD-ROMs and VCDs. Since the importation of pirated product has been on the increase, we have encouraged enhanced cooperation with regional customs authorities, such as those in Hong Kong and Macau, Vietnam and others, to stop this trade in pirated product.

Under our bilateral agreements, market access for computer software, motion pictures, videos and sound recordings have improved. China has also made further commitments on market access in the context of our November 1999 bilateral WTO agreement, which have now been incorporated into China's accession agreement.

i. Further Steps to Improve Protection for IPR and Market Access

China's last major revisions to its intellectual property rights laws and regulations occurred after the 1992 Bilateral Agreement. Based on its experience in implementing its intellectual property rights laws, Chinese authorities have revised the copyright, patent and trademark laws and are taking further steps necessary to comply with the requirements of the TRIPS Agreement. The United States has also urged China to do a comprehensive amendment to its copyright laws to implement two copyright-related agreements negotiated under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) that China has signed but not yet ratified.

Chinese enforcement of copyrights and trademarks is still uneven from province to province. Guangdong province, for example, has significantly increased sanctions against piracy and counterfeiting. We are encouraging the national government and/or the other provinces to do likewise. Of concern is the unauthorized use of software by private enterprises (end-user piracy). Piracy rates of entertainment software (game compact discs) and other audiovisual products are also very high. Although strong steps have been taken to address the production of pirated software, CDs and VCDs, far too many pirated products remain available at the retail level.

Trademark counterfeiting in China has worsened considerably. During recent discussions we have also raised the growing problem with trademark counterfeiting, particularly in the area of consumer goods, protection for unregistered well-known trademarks and effective enforcement against counterfeiters. In part to address these concerns, the Chinese launched a nationwide anti-counterfeiting campaign in October 2000. The results are as yet inconclusive.

Access for foreign sound recordings has improved, but restrictions on distribution remain a key concern. Although imports of foreign video titles have increased rapidly, the Chinese still impose an unofficial quota on foreign motion pictures that are distributed on a revenue-sharing basis. China maintains this limit through a state-owned import monopoly.

China committed in its November 1999 bilateral WTO agreement with the United States to increase market access for the audiovisual sector, and these commitments were subsequently incorporated into China's accession agreement. China will allow foreigners to distribute videos, entertainment software and sound recordings through joint ventures, and will allow the importation of 20 motion pictures annually on a revenue sharing basis.

ii. WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights

With its acceptance of the TRIPS Agreement when it acceded to the WTO, China took on the obligation to adhere to internationally accepted norms to protect and enforce the intellectual property rights of U.S. and other foreign companies and individuals in China. In 2001, as part of its efforts to comply with the TRIPS Agreement, China was in the process of modifying the full range of intellectual property laws and regulations, including those relating to patents, trademarks, trade secrets, integrated circuits and copyrights. In addition, provisions in its accession agreement require China to strengthen the enforcement of these laws and regulations by its courts and the responsible administrative agencies.

d. 1992 Market Access Agreement

The United States and China signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Market Access in 1992. This Agreement committed China to changes in its import regime over a five-year period, including increased transparency, elimination of quotas and licenses, a guarantee that no trade law or regulation could be enforced unless published, uniform application of trade rules, elimination of import substitution policies, and agreement that any sanitary and phytosanitary measures would be based on sound science.

While China phased-out formal measures, such as certain quotas and licenses, serious problems remained during 2001 as China continued to restrict imports by retaining non-uniform application of trade rules, import substitution policies and use of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards.

China's accession agreement includes these same commitments as well as many additional ones. Consequently, the commitments made by China in the 1992 Memorandum of Understanding have been, in effect, multilateralized, and therefore the United States will no longer be alone in seeking compliance from China.

e. Satellite Launch Services

The 1989 Bilateral Agreement on International Trade in Commercial Launch Services with China was extended in 1995 to cover the period through 2001. The Agreement was intended to balance the interests of the U.S. satellite and commercial space launch industries, while encouraging free trade by allowing China to enter the international market for commercial space launch services in a fair and non-disruptive manner. The extended Agreement continued quantitative and pricing disciplines established under the earlier Agreement. The Agreement also specifically provided that nothing in the Agreement limited the operation of U.S. export control laws.

In March 2001, the government of China hosted a delegation from the United States for consultations under the terms of the Agreement. The consultations included an exchange of information on the commercial satellite launch market and new developments in China's commercial space program as well as a review of the implementation of the Agreement.

The Agreement expired, pursuant to its terms, on December 31, 2001. No determination has been made regarding any future arrangement with China governing international trade in commercial launch services.