I. INTRODUCTION

The Biden-Harris Administration is building the economy from the middle out and the bottom up. We created 3.1 million jobs last year—more than any year under the previous administration—for a total of 14.8 million jobs created under President Biden. Unemployment has been under 4 percent for 24 months in a row, which is the longest stretch in over 50 years, with record lows for Black workers, workers with disabilities, and workers without a high school diploma. More Americans are in the workforce than before the pandemic, and inflation fell to 2 percent over the last six months. We have seen a record 15 million applications to start new businesses under President Biden. Our Administration is fighting every day to lower costs for hardworking families, rebuilding American manufacturing and strengthening supply chains so Americans get the products they need when they need them, and investing in clean energy to respond to the climate crisis while lowering energy bills. The American Rescue Plan, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the CHIPS and Science Act, and the Inflation Reduction Act were historic investments in America, and they are working.

The Biden-Harris Administration is using trade as a force for good. Our trade policy is a key part of this Administration's vision to deliver economic justice and to democratize economic opportunity. Done right, and in coordination with other policy disciplines, it can grow the middle class, address inequality, and tackle the climate crisis. We remain committed to a fair and open global trading system—one that puts working families first, raises living standards, ensures full employment, and promotes sustainable development. As a member of the White House Competition Council, the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) will continue to level the playing field by prioritizing fair competition in our bilateral and plurilateral negotiations to reduce vulnerabilities and supply chain chokepoints and reverse the race to the bottom.

Our new approach to trade is centered on bringing more people into the process and developing policies and initiatives that are resilient and sustainable and create broad-based growth. In 2024, our trade agenda will continue to focus on unlocking new opportunities for American workers and families—while also supporting and strengthening the middle class, driving decarbonization and sustainability, and creating good-paying jobs across the American economy. In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, it also means fortifying relationships with our partners and allies and strengthening critical supply chains to withstand shocks and disruptions to the system and to defend democratic values.

Realizing this vision starts with enforcing our existing trade agreements to hold our trading partners accountable, including under the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA). Under the USMCA's transformative Facility-Specific Rapid Response Labor Mechanism (RRM), we will continue to secure tangible results for workers across industries, raise labor standards across North America, and drive a race to the top. We are also using other mechanisms to open, maintain, and enhance access to markets and address unfair trade practices that harm our workers and businesses and ensure that they enjoy the benefits that they were promised.

This also means continuing to forge new partnerships, especially with developing economies, and deepening existing ones to update the rules governing the global economy and trade.

In June 2023, the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) and the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States (TECRO) signed the first agreement under the United States–Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade, which includes important commitments and economically meaningful outcomes in a number of areas, including customs administration and trade facilitation, good regulatory practices, services domestic regulation, anticorruption, and small and medium-sized enterprises. We will continue negotiations on additional chapters in 2024 under the auspices of AIT and TECRO.

In 2023, U.S. Trade Representative Tai visited Nairobi to meet with the Kenyan President and other government officials, and labor, civil society, and private sector stakeholders to take note of progress under the United States–Kenya Strategic Trade and Investment Partnership (STIP). We will continue discussions with Kenya to make progress on negotiations toward this bilateral trade agreement in the year ahead.

In the Indo-Pacific and the Western Hemisphere, the United States is leading with a positive economic vision through the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) and the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity (Americas Partnership). With the European Union (EU), we are intensifying cooperation on pressing issues, such as the People's Republic of China's (PRC) non-market policies and practices. Further, we are continuing negotiations on a first-of-its-kind trade arrangement to address non-market excess capacity and the greenhouse gas emissions of the steel and aluminum industries. We are also continuing to utilize the Trade and Technology Council (TTC) and the Trade and Labor Dialogue to pursue shared priorities with the EU, including supply chain resilience, challenges posed by non-market economies, inclusive digital trade, and the elimination of forced labor from global supply chains.

Following the successful U.S.–Africa Leaders Summit in December 2022, our Administration is continuing to strengthen our partnerships with the African continent, as demonstrated by a successful United States–sub-Saharan Africa Trade and Economic Cooperation Forum (AGOA Forum) in November 2023. The United States will host the AGOA Forum this year and will continue supporting Africa's regional and continental integration efforts, with the well-being of workers, women, and youth informing our work, among other priorities.

At the World Trade Organization (WTO), the United States continues to drive the conversation on transforming the institution to be more responsive to the rapidly changing global economic environment, the needs of workers and their communities, and global environmental challenges such as climate change.

Finally, a vital element of our effort to build an inclusive trade policy agenda is to meet people where they are, particularly those who have been historically excluded from the policymaking process and the benefits of trade. In 2023, U.S. Trade Representative Tai and USTR officials visited more than 20 states to hear directly from farmers, agricultural producers, workers, union leaders, indigenous leaders, and small business owners.

This also means seeking public input on inclusive trade policy and better understanding the effects of trade policy on underrepresented, underserved, and overburdened workers and communities, and ensuring that they have a say in how our policies are designed and implemented going forward. The independent United States International Trade Commission's (USITC) first-of-its-kind study of the distributional effects of trade and trade policy on U.S. workers brought to light the devastating effects experienced by certain communities and illustrated the lack of data, and particularly disaggregated data, that could further inform a more equitable trade policy. USTR will closely monitor the ongoing distributional effects investigation, which began in October 2023, and will continue working with partners to design trade policy that addresses inequality and supports the goals and aspirations of all Americans. USTR will also continue to implement its Equity Action Plan to ensure that equity, including racial and gender equity, is embedded in its work.

By placing workers and everyday people at the center of our trade policy, the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to use trade to build a durable and fair tomorrow by pursuing resilience, sustainability, and inclusive prosperity.

II. ADVANCING A WORKER-CENTERED TRADE POLICY

A. Standing up for Workers' Rights

In an interconnected global economy, the rights of workers around the world impact workers in the United States as well. That is why our Administration will always put workers and their rights at the center of our trade policies. We are continuing our unprecedented work to restore worker power, promote good jobs, and strengthen U.S. competitiveness. Through the first-ever Presidential Memorandum on workers' rights globally, we are institutionalizing labor diplomacy and labor engagements through our embassies, aligning our efforts in multilateral fora to pursue high labor standards and enhance worker protections and workers' right to organize, and lifting up labor stakeholders' voices.

Trading partners should compete on the merits, not on the basis of exploitation. Through the Biden-Harris Administration's efforts to promote fair competition, we will continue to level the playing field for American workers. One of the Administration's top priorities is the effective enforcement of the USMCA, which includes the strongest labor provisions in any trade agreement ever, as well as a ground-breaking enforcement tool, the RRM. The RRM allows the United States to quickly take action and target specific facilities in Mexico where workers are being denied their rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining.

The United States invoked the RRM nineteen times since 2021, including thirteen times in 2023, at facilities that span various sectors, including the automotive, apparel, transportation services, and call center industries. Several cases remain ongoing, while fourteen have already resulted in either comprehensive remediation plans between the United States and Mexico or were successfully resolved during the RRM review process. Eight cases resulted in backpay to workers, six resulted in reinstatement of workers, eight resulted in independent unions representing workers at the facility, and many resulted in successful negotiation for higher wages, workers' rights trainings, and improved policies at the facilities.

For example, in May 2023, the United States requested Mexico's review of whether the Goodyear SLP facility in San Luis Potosi was denying workers the beneficial terms of a sector-wide agreement, and instead subjecting them to an inferior facility-specific agreement negotiated between the company and an incumbent, employer-aligned union. As a result of the RRM, the United States and Mexico decided on a course of remediation that included applying the sector-wide agreement at the facility and educating workers on the benefits they are entitled to in that agreement, improving and maintaining salaries and benefits to match the terms of that agreement, and providing $4 million in backpay to workers for pay they should have received under the sector-wide agreement. Workers at the facility ultimately voted to remove the incumbent union and elected an independent union to represent their interest.

In August 2023, the United States requested Mexico's review of whether pilots at Aerotransportes Mas de Carga (Mas Air) were being harassed, intimidated and retaliated against due to their union affiliation, and whether the company denied the pilots the opportunity to vote on an accurate and appropriately presented collective bargaining agreement. As a result of the RRM, the pilots who were unjustly dismissed from the company were offered reinstatement and backpay, or severance if they did not want to return to their former jobs. In addition, the company adopted and posted a position of neutrality on collective bargaining, and created a hotline where workers can anonymously submit complaints about labor rights violations. Mexico also provided workers' rights trainings to the pilots. The pilots were later able to vote for representation, resulting in the election of an independent union to represent them at the facility.

While the United States and Mexico have by-and-large worked closely and collaboratively through this mechanism, we have not always been able to resolve RRM matters on our own, such as in the Grupo Mexico San Martin Mine case. There, the United States requested Mexico to review whether the mine operator in Zacatecas chose to bypass the existing union—which had the sole right to collectively bargain with the operator—and to resume operations during an ongoing strike. After Mexico found no denial of workers' rights, the United States requested a dispute settlement panel under the USMCA to make its own assessment. This marked the first time a panel has been convened in connection with the mechanism.

These are only some of the year's successes under the RRM. They show that we can work with trading partners to promote workers' rights and workplace democracy, which not only benefits workers abroad but creates a more level playing field for U.S. workers. Moreover, by prioritizing the advancement of workers' rights in our interactions with trading partners, we are cultivating mutually beneficial relationships that enhance workplace democracy and labor protections internationally. USTR, working with the U.S. Department of Labor and other agencies that make up the USMCA Interagency Labor Committee for Monitoring and Enforcement, will continue to support workers and work with the Government of Mexico to closely monitor situations that may involve violations of workers' rights. The Biden-Harris Administration will continue to utilize the RRM wherever necessary to address denials of workers' rights.

Another ground-breaking achievement of the USMCA is the requirement that each Party prohibit the importation of goods produced with forced labor. The United States is working closely with Canada and Mexico to exchange information on enforcement approaches and best practices related to addressing forced labor risks in supply chains, including through a trilateral dialogue, with the goal of a North America free from imports produced with forced labor.

In addition to our work under the USMCA, our Administration undertook several efforts to advance workers' rights and raise labor standards to create sustainable growth, including on addressing forced labor.

• In 2023, USTR conducted a thorough interagency review of existing trade policies and tools to combat forced labor as well as review of public comments to develop its first-ever focused trade strategy to combat forced labor. The strategy will include objectives and key priorities for addressing forced labor through trade policy. USTR looks forward to releasing the strategy in 2024 and bringing further attention to the U.S. Government toolkit, which has been cultivated over the last 25 years to prevent this harmful practice.

• In October 2023, the G7 Trade Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to take measures to eradicate forced labor and the importance of promoting respect for human rights and international labor standards in business activities and global supply chains. The United States will continue to work with our trading partners through multilateral fora to highlight, and spur progress on, the scourge of forced labor.

• Through the Trade and Labor Dialogue with the European Union, the United States will continue to work with union and business leaders to eliminate forced labor in global supply chains and to ensure an equitable green transition for workers and businesses.

• In January 2023, the United States also signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with Japan to launch a Task Force on the Promotion of Human Rights and International Labor Standards in Supply Chains under the U.S.–Japan Partnership on Trade. Through the Task Force, the United States and Japan plan to exchange information on relevant laws, policies, and guidance, facilitate stakeholder dialogues with businesses and worker organizations, and promote best practices for human rights and internationally recognized labor rights due diligence.

• USTR serves as an active member of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security-led (DHS) Forced Labor Enforcement Task Force (FLETF), which is responsible for monitoring the enforcement of the prohibition on importing goods made by forced labor. The FLETF is also responsible for implementing the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (UFLPA), which aims to prevent the systemic use of forced labor in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR) by strengthening the existing prohibition against the importation of goods made wholly or in part with forced labor into the United States. Our Administration will continue to fully enforce our laws prohibiting the import of goods made by forced labor and fight against the economic exploitation and human rights abuses committed against Uyghurs and other ethnic and religious minorities in the PRC.

• In 2023, the Biden-Harris Administration deepened its engagement with the Government of Bangladesh, domestic labor stakeholders, and U.S. and international brands on strengthening labor rights protections for Bangladeshi workers. USTR will continue to work with its partners in the federal government and stakeholders to engage with Bangladesh on necessary labor reforms, including aligning its domestic labor laws with international labor standards; addressing growing concerns on worker rights in the areas of violence against and harassment of workers, unfair labor practices, freedom of association, collective bargaining, as outlined in the International Labor Organization Road Map; and establishing a fair and transparent minimum wage process for garment workers.

• In 2023, the United States and the Philippines launched a new Labor Working Group under the United States–Philippines Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA). Through the Labor Working Group, the United States is seeking concrete actions to protect union organizers against violence and harassment, promote workers' rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining, as well as to facilitate dialogue among U.S. and Philippine governments, worker organizations, and employer organizations to inform the objectives of the group.

• Published in January 2023, the 2022 Review of Notorious Markets for Counterfeiting and Piracy included an issue focus section that examined the impact of online piracy on U.S. workers. The section described how online piracy can impact the wages, residuals, pensions, and health care benefits that workers in the creative industries depend on and how government and stakeholder coordination is critical to effectively address the rapidly shifting delivery methods of infringing content.

The Biden-Harris Administration is also bringing its worker-centered trade policy and commitment to fair competition to other multilateral fora and to bilateral discussions.

During 2023, the United States continued to support including labor issues in the next generation of trade agreements negotiated by Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) economies. To further this goal, USTR established an APEC work program in the Committee on Trade and Investment examining the importance of multi-stakeholder engagement in trade policy and proposed a project on labor-related technical assistance and capacity building provisions in regional trade arrangements and free trade agreements. Further, for the first time at the Trade Ministers-level, the United States led a conversation with prominent U.S. labor leaders during the APEC Ministers Responsible for Trade Meeting in May 2023. U.S. leadership in APEC's Human Resources Development Working Group culminated in the unanimous adoption of the Detroit Non-Binding Principles and Recommendations by Senior Officials in October 2023, establishing social dialogue as a region-wide tool for shaping economic policies across the Asia-Pacific region.

In November 2023, the United States and South Africa co-hosted the 20th AGOA Forum in Johannesburg, which included a side event dedicated solely to labor issues and a breakout session on the topic of "Enhancing Women Workers' Voices to Promote Rights at Work and Inclusive Development." The Forum underscored, among other matters, the importance of worker rights and inclusive, sustainable trade and trade policies. The United States will host the AGOA Forum this year and build upon last year's unprecedented convening of trade ministers, labor, civil society, the private sector, the African Diaspora, and micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises.

The United States continues to call upon other regional and multilateral organizations to consider how they can more effectively hear from workers and be relevant in addressing the needs of ordinary people. In 2024, the United States will continue advocating for workers' rights on the world stage and collaborating with our partners and allies to improve outcomes for workers across the globe.

B. Accelerating Decarbonization and Promoting Sustainable Environmental Practices

Accelerating decarbonization and promoting environmentally sustainable practices continue to be top priorities for the Biden-Harris Administration, especially as the climate crisis is having a particular impact on underserved and overburdened communities and is a serious environmental justice concern. Trade is an indispensable tool to achieve these goals. In 2024, the United States will continue to use a range of available tools, including new and existing trade initiatives, to seek higher levels of environmental protection from our trading partners and promote decarbonization efforts necessary to keep a global warming limit of 1.5 degrees Celsius within reach.

New Agreements and Approaches to Advance Our Climate Goals and Protect the Environment

Collaborating with key trading partners to forge new partnerships and create new approaches is critical to promote a sustainable trade agenda.

In October 2021, the United States and the EU launched negotiations on the world's first emissions-based sectoral arrangement on steel and aluminum trade, known as the Global Arrangement on Sustainable Steel and Aluminum (Global Arrangement). Through these negotiations, the United States is seeking an innovative model that incentivizes emissions reductions while limiting anti-competitive and non-market global worldwide excess capacity. A successful Global Arrangement would drive investment in green steel and aluminum production in the United States, Europe, and around the world, reducing emissions in two of the most carbon-intensive industrial sectors and ensuring a competitive U.S. steel and aluminum industry for decades to come. In 2024, we will continue our discussions with the EU on a forward-looking, high-standard arrangement, while providing predictability and stability to steel and aluminum workers and their families on both sides of the Atlantic. We will also engage other partners interested in our goals for the Global Arrangement. This arrangement will be proof that trade policy is an important part of our climate agenda, and that effective climate action can—and must—support good-paying, quality jobs.

To help inform these continued discussions on the steel and aluminum sectors, in June 2023, USTR requested that the USITC investigate and publish a report to assess the greenhouse gas emissions intensity of steel and aluminum produced in the United States.

Through regional engagements, such as the IPEF and the Americas Partnership, and our bilateral negotiations with Kenya and Taiwan, we will pursue opportunities to maintain and improve levels of environmental protection of our trading partners and increase climate ambition, including to decarbonize our respective economies. We will seek commitments by our trading partners that will enable and mobilize the technologies, public and private investment, and technical resources needed to scale up clean energy infrastructure and facilitate trade in climate-friendly goods, services, and technologies, while generating high-quality jobs that power economic growth and advance progress toward the goals of the Paris Agreement.

Additionally, in 2024, the United States will continue to advance our priorities on trade and environment under the United States–European Union TTC. This will include continuing work under the Transatlantic Initiative on Sustainable Trade, in particular to advance our respective priorities to address the climate crisis and further advance a resilient, sustainable, and inclusive trade agenda.

The United States will also continue working to address unsustainable and illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing practices that are destroying the marine ecosystem. For decades, IUU fishing has been a global problem affecting ocean ecosystems, threatening economic and food security, and putting law-abiding fishers and seafood producers at a disadvantage. The United States has been a leader in combating IUU fishing and, through implementation of our National Strategy for Combating Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing and other Maritime Security and Fisheries Enforcement Act of December 2019 initiatives, we will continue to work to curtail the global trade in seafood and seafood products derived from IUU fishing and promote global maritime security. We will also continue to enhance existing activities through new initiatives to comprehensively address IUU fishing and associated labor rights abuses, including working to prevent importation of IUU fish and fish products or those associated with forced labor.

Further, in the lead up to and during the Twelfth Ministerial Conference of the WTO, in June 2022, we worked with other WTO Members to conclude the Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies, the first-ever multilateral WTO agreement with the environment at its core. The Agreement prohibits subsidies to vessels or operators engaged in IUU fishing, for fishing overfished stocks, and for fishing on the unregulated high seas. Moreover, the Agreement contains strong transparency provisions that will add significant understanding of the universe of fish subsidies. In April 2023, the United States became one of the first WTO Members to deposit its instrument of acceptance of the Agreement. The Biden-Harris Administration will continue to work with other Members to both bring this new Agreement into force and to continue negotiations to build on this Agreement with additional disciplines on subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity and to enhance transparency related to forced labor on fishing vessels.

Environmental sustainability, including supporting circular economy approaches, was a priority during our APEC host year in 2023, under the theme of "Creating a Resilient and Sustainable Future for All." To advance this priority, the United States promoted multiple efforts to better address environmental and climate challenges. For example, we led a Recyclable Materials Policy Program (RMPP) under APEC's Committee on Trade and Investment. Under this program, the United States hosted a successful workshop and developed a report to guide economies' efforts in the trade and investment of compostable bioplastics products while reducing plastics pollution throughout the APEC region. We also hosted a Good Regulatory Practices Greening the Economy session to share best practices and discuss shared challenges in remanufacturing. In 2024, the United States will continue to further APEC work in areas such as trade in remanufactured goods; verifying the environmental contributions of certain goods, services, and technologies; and enabling the development, deployment, and uptake of relevant new technologies, such as zero-emission and autonomous vehicles.

The United States also seeks to continue to protect our shared environment, including oceans and marine resources, those whose livelihoods depend on them, and local communities, from the harm caused by plastics pollution. In 2022, the United States supported the launch of multilateral negotiations for an international agreement on ocean plastics pollution. In 2023, the United States joined the WTO Dialogue on Plastics Pollution and Environmentally Sustainable Plastics Trade (DPP) and will continue to seek opportunities to tackle plastics pollution. In 2024, we will continue efforts in both the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee on Plastic Pollution, launched by the United Nations Environment Assembly, and the WTO, recognizing the role that trade plays as both a contributor to the problem of plastics pollution, and its potential to serve as an important part of the solution.

Further, the United States will continue to support and promote more resource-efficient and circular economy approaches in other international fora, and expand and deepen climate-related discussions at the WTO and continue U.S. leadership in these areas, including through the WTO's Committee on Trade and Environment and the Trade and Environmental Sustainability Structured Discussions (TESSD), and at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).

Enforcing Environmental Provisions Through Existing Agreements and Tools

The United States will also continue to take innovative approaches through our existing agreements and tools to advance our climate and environmental goals.

The USMCA provides another important example of how trade policy, when done right, is a powerful tool to advance responsible climate action. The Agreement includes the most comprehensive environmental commitments of any U.S. trade agreement, including provisions to address wildlife trafficking, illegal logging and IUU fishing, fisheries subsidies, marine litter, and air and water pollution. The United States is fully engaging with the Governments of Canada and Mexico on these issues, including by hosting a marine litter workshop in March 2023 and through the third meeting of the USMCA Environment Committee in September 2023.

The Biden-Harris Administration is using the full range of tools at its disposal to confront these issues.

On February 10, 2022, USTR requested consultations with Mexico under the environment chapter of the USMCA, concerning the effectiveness of Mexico's enforcement of its environmental laws and compliance with its USMCA environment commitments relating to the protection of the vaquita porpoise, the prevention of illegal fishing, and trafficking of totoaba fish. Since that time, USTR has led a number of technical-level consultations, in an attempt to develop a plan of action to enhance Mexico's enforcement of its fisheries-related environmental laws in the Upper Gulf of California and implementation of its USMCA environment commitments. The United States proposed the plan of action in August 2022 and received Mexico's counterproposal in January 2023. Mexico's counterproposal lacked the substance required by the United States to resolve the environment consultations at the technical level and as such, the United States elevated the consultations to the Senior Representative level in March 2023. Following discussion at the Senior Representative level, and a detailed review of the Compliance Action Plan submitted by Mexico to the Secretariat of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the United States shared a revised draft plan of action with Mexico on September 12, 2023 and will continue to work to ensure that Mexico abides by its USMCA commitments.

Another example is our work on illegally-harvested timber, which harms the environment, depletes natural resources, and disadvantages U.S. workers and businesses who use lawful and sustainable means to make their goods.

In October 2021, the United States announced an agreement with Vietnam that addresses U.S. concerns in the Vietnam Timber Section 301 investigation. This was the first Section 301 investigation to address an environmental concern, and the agreement secures commitments that will help keep illegally harvested or traded timber out of the supply chain and protect the environment and natural resources.

In April 2022, the United States and Vietnam convened the first meeting of the Timber Working Group (TWG) under that agreement, which was established to facilitate coordination between the parties and oversee the implementation of the Timber Agreement. The third meeting of the TWG was convened in August 2023. These meetings established a strong basis for continued implementation of the Timber Agreement. In 2024, the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to closely monitor Vietnam's implementation of this agreement. Further, we will also work to identify other trading partners that engage in practices related to the import and use of illegal timber, and we are prepared to take action to address this serious environmental concern, as needed.

In October 2023, USTR announced that the Interagency Committee on Trade in Timber Products from Peru (Timber Committee) has directed United States Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to continue to block any timber products originating from Peru that were produced or exported by Inversiones La Oroza SRL (Oroza), a Peruvian exporter, based on illegally harvested timber found in its supply chain in 2016. The Timber Committee directed CBP to continue to deny entry to any future shipments of timber products originating from Peru that were produced or exported by Oroza until the Government of Peru demonstrates that Oroza has complied with all applicable laws, regulations, and other measures of Peru governing the harvest of and trade in timber. The United States will continue to engage closely with Peru to combat illegal logging and work toward improving forest sector governance.

Moreover, the United States will continue to monitor implementation of environmental provisions of all our trade agreements, including the United States–Chile Free Trade Agreement, the United States–Peru Trade Promotion Agreement, the United States–Panama Trade Promotion Agreement, the Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement, and the United States–Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement.

The Biden-Harris Administration will continue to use all available tools—and create new ones as needed—to use trade policy to tackle the climate crisis and to protect the environment.

C. Supporting U.S. Agriculture

The Biden-Harris Administration also recognizes that farmers, ranchers, fishers, and food manufacturers are key to our inclusive, worker-centered trade policy, and we are achieving quick, economically meaningful wins for them. From 2000 to 2023, annual U.S. agricultural exports grew from $58 billion to $181 billion.

In 2024, our Administration will continue to improve economic opportunities for U.S. farmers, ranchers, and food manufacturers by expanding market access opportunities in foreign markets through the negotiation of agreements that include provisions intended to eliminate or reduce nontariff barriers that can hamper market access for U.S. agricultural products. The Administration will seek to include in these agreements enforceable provisions that build on WTO obligations, including provisions to ensure that sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures are science-based, developed through transparent, predictable processes, and implemented in a nondiscriminatory manner.

U.S. farmers are integral to the Biden-Harris Administration's worker-centered trade policy, and they will see more open trade in 2024 as a result of our ongoing efforts. We will continue to build upon the many wins achieved for our stakeholders in 2023, including:

• In April 2023, Japan implemented a new biofuels policy that will allow the United States to capture up to 100 percent of Japan's on-road ethanol market. Under the new policy, exports of U.S. ethanol could increase by over 80 million gallons annually, representing an additional $150 to $200 million in exports each year.

• In May 2023, the Bangladesh Ministry of Agriculture published a regulatory order allowing the importation of U.S. cotton into Bangladesh without fumigation on-arrival, removing a longstanding trade irritant.

• In June 2023, India and the United States agreed to terminate six WTO disputes, and India removed retaliatory tariffs on several U.S. products, including chickpeas, lentils, almonds, walnuts, apples, boric acid, and diagnostic reagents. Further, in September 2023, India and the United States agreed to resolve the remaining WTO poultry-avian influenza dispute. As part of the agreement, India agreed to reduce tariffs on certain U.S. products, including frozen turkey, frozen duck, fresh blueberries and cranberries, frozen blueberries and cranberries, dried blueberries and cranberries, and processed blueberries and cranberries to applied tariff rates of five to ten percent.

• In September 2023, the EU agreed to the continued use of simplified export certificates for U.S. wine exports to the EU. The EU had previously indicated changes to this export certificate under new ingredient labeling regulations for wine. The simplified export certificate streamlines the importation of U.S. wine into the EU. In 2022, U.S. exports of wine and related products to the EU were $209 million.

• In October 2023, following extensive engagement by USTR, including interventions at the WTO Committee on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, South Africa announced the lifting of restrictions on U.S. poultry and poultry product exports from 27 U.S. states that have been declared free from highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). South Africa's restrictions on U.S. poultry had been in place well after the U.S. states had been declared HPAI-free. In 2022, U.S. exports of poultry and poultry products to South Africa were $57 million.

These outcomes demonstrate the Biden-Harris Administration's continued commitment to work constructively with our trading partners to provide greater economic opportunity for U.S. producers and rural communities.

Enforcement also plays a critical role in promoting predictability and leveling the playing field in agricultural trade. The Biden-Harris Administration will continue enforcing our existing agreements so U.S. producers can compete on a level playing field in global markets.

For example, the United States will continue to hold Canada to its commitments through enforcement action under the USMCA. In January 2022, the United States won a USMCA dispute on Canada's dairy tariff-rate quota (TRQ) allocation measures. Canada's revised policies did not fix the problem for U.S. dairy farmers, and despite the conclusions of the November 2023 panel report, the United States continues to have serious concerns about how Canada is implementing the dairy market access commitments it made in the USMCA. The United States will continue to work to address this issue with Canada, and we will not hesitate to use all available tools to enforce our trade agreements and ensure that U.S. workers, farmers, manufacturers, and exporters receive the full benefits of the USMCA.

Additionally, the United States continues to engage with Mexico to address concerns with Mexico's policies regarding agricultural biotechnology, which threaten to cause serious economic harm to U.S. farmers and Mexican livestock producers, and stifle important innovations needed to help producers respond to pressing climate and food security challenges. In August 2023, after undergoing dispute settlement consultations with Mexico under the USMCA, the United States established a dispute settlement panel under the USMCA. Through the dispute panel, the United States will seek to resolve our concerns and help ensure that consumers can continue to access safe and affordable food and agricultural products and American farmers can continue to access the Mexican market and use innovative tools to respond to climate and food security challenges.

In 2024, the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to ensure that our trade agreements benefit American workers, farmers, ranchers, and producers. We will also use our enforcement tools as necessary to ensure that our trading partners deliver on their commitments and that U.S. agricultural products are not subject to unfair, unjustified, or discriminatory restrictions.

D. Bolstering Supply Chain Resilience

Strengthening our supply chains is a critical component of the Biden-Harris Administration's efforts to advance our worker-centered trade policy, create sustainable economic growth, and ensure that the global trade and economic system is more resilient in the face of supply shocks. We are undertaking a whole-of-government effort to proactively strengthen supply chain resilience and mitigate the impact of disruptions, including the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine. To advance this priority, USTR continues to craft a new approach to trade and investment policy, one that is supported by innovative tools and strategies, closely integrated and coordinated with domestic economic policy and support for U.S. manufacturing, and advances the principles of transparency, diversity, security, and sustainability.

This includes addressing supply chain risks arising from unfair trade practices, creating opportunities for businesses to increase sourcing options, including and especially those located domestically, facilitating the movement of supply chains to trusted partners through friend-shoring and near-shoring, and strengthening labor standards and environmental protections governing global supply chains.

Pursuant to Executive Order 14017 (America's Supply Chains), which President Biden signed in 2021, our Administration began assessing vulnerabilities in and taking action to strengthen the resilience of, critical U.S. supply chains, including conducting a 100-day review for four priority product areas—semiconductors, large capacity batteries, critical minerals and materials, and pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients—and detailed assessments of seven industrial bases.

As a member of the White House Council on Supply Chain Resilience, USTR will continue to work across the U.S. Government and engage and coordinate with like-minded trading partners to develop durable solutions that advance supply chain resilience, including to address food security, facilitate trade in safe and effective medicines and minimize drug shortages, secure smoother and more efficient movement of essential goods during a pandemic, and protect the uninterrupted flow of trade to and within North America during an emergency.

Reducing dependencies and vulnerabilities and strengthening supply chain resilience is also at the heart of all our trade initiatives, including the IPEF—which has a pillar dedicated to this issue—and the Americas Partnership. Further, in March 2023, the United States and Japan signed a critical minerals agreement to strengthen and diversify critical minerals supply chains, promote fair competition and market-oriented conditions for trade in critical minerals, advance robust labor and environmental standards, and cooperate in efforts to ensure secure, transparent, sustainable, and equitable critical minerals supply chains. Our Administration is pursuing similar agreements with the European Union and the United Kingdom, and will continue to promote economic security and supply chain resilience with partners and allies and in multilateral fora like the G7, G20, APEC, and the OECD.

The Biden-Harris Administration will continue its work to bolster supply chain resilience to promote economic security, good-paying jobs and worker protections, and the health of small and medium-sized businesses, with strong standards for environmental sustainability and community engagement. Further, steps to address identified supply chain vulnerabilities and develop the foundation for increased resilience will be an important component of the United States' ongoing engagement with its trade partners.

III. RE-ALIGNING THE U.S.-CHINA TRADE RELATIONSHIP

The U.S.-China economic and trade relationship is one of profound consequence. As the two largest economies in the world, the bilateral relationship affects not just the two participants, but the entire globe.

The Biden-Harris Administration acknowledges that this relationship is complex and competitive. With respect to trade, competition must be fair. The PRC's approach to trade is marked by pervasive non-market policies and practices that drive frictions in many of the PRC's relationships—not just ours. The PRC, as a large, non-market economy, uses its unique leverage to distort the marketplace through unfair, anticompetitive practices, which harm workers and businesses in the United States and in other countries, including some of our closest allies and partners. At the same time, by unduly concentrating production of certain goods in the PRC, these non-market policies and practices also undermine supply chain resilience and harm consumers that, in the long run, are deprived of the innovation and choice that fair competition would produce.

To successfully counter the range of threats posed by the PRC, we must be frank about the challenges we face. The PRC became a dominant supplier for many important goods and technologies by manipulating cost structures and controlling key industries. Additionally, the PRC uses trade and economic measures in an abusive or arbitrary way to achieve strategic political objectives.

The PRC has also unfairly limited market access for imported goods and services and restricted the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in the PRC. Further, it has used various, often illicit, means to secure foreign intellectual property and technology to pursue its industrial policy objectives.

The PRC fails to provide its people with even fundamental labor rights, including the right to organize and bargain collectively. Low operating costs resulting from artificially low wages and poor worker protections remain some of the key reasons why companies have chosen to offshore production there. Moreover, the use of state-sponsored forced labor, including in the XUAR, is an affront to human dignity and a further example of the PRC's unfair, non-market economic policies and practices.

Similarly, the PRC uses environmental policies designed to make it a manufacturing destination of choice for production processes that would be barred in other countries. The PRC's unfair, non-market policies and practices are also reflected in its approach to the environment, including: its weak environmental regulation and enforcement; subsidies that contribute to overfishing; illegal fishing practices; decimation of the infrastructure for recyclable commodities through a vast web of import bans; and overproduction of industrial goods. The PRC's policies are also harmful to the environment, including its tolerance of imports of illegally harvested wildlife products, which enables a major source of demand.

To address these challenges, the Biden-Harris Administration is taking a holistic and pragmatic approach to our relationship grounded in the principles of our worker-centered trade policy.

It starts with the groundbreaking domestic investments enacted through the President's leadership, which allow the United States to engage and compete with the PRC from a position of strength. This includes, for example, repairing our roads and bridges through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, bolstering our capacity for critical technologies through the CHIPS and Science Act, and manufacturing clean energy technology through the Inflation Reduction Act. In addition, we are taking steps to build supply chain resilience that will defend American workers and consumers from the harms wrought by the PRC's trade and economic abuses. We are also considering all existing tools—and will seek new ones as needed—to combat the harms of the PRC's state-led, non-market policies and practices.

Critically, we are bringing renewed focus to engagement with our partners and allies, whose workers and societies also suffer harm from the PRC's unfair trade and economic practices. We share core democratic values and an essential interest in fair, market-based competition. Our collective ability to defend against the PRC's unfair practices requires that democratic, market economies continue the resolve to confront policies and practices that are fundamentally at odds with a global trading system based on fair market competition.

The United States will continue to engage with partners and allies in multiple formats to develop and coordinate effective responses to non-market policies and practices in order to defend U.S. workers and industries, enhance economic security, and strengthen supply chains.

For example, in June 2023, Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States endorsed a Joint Declaration expressing a shared concern and commitment to work together to effectively deter and address trade-related economic coercion and non-market policies and practices, including efforts to coordinate responses on economic coercion. In 2024, our Administration will continue similar efforts in the G7 and bilaterally with the European Union, Japan, and others.

The Biden-Harris Administration will continue holding the PRC accountable for its use of state-sponsored forced labor, which is not just an extreme form of unfair competition but a moral stain. The United States is implementing and enforcing its statutory ban on the importation of goods made in whole or in part with forced labor, including through implementation of the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act. The Administration will also continue working with our trading partners and businesses to eradicate the use of forced labor throughout global supply chains. To support this effort, the United States issued an addendum to the Xinjiang Supply Chain business advisory in 2023.

We are also mindful of the effects that trade actions can have on American businesses, especially small businesses, and workers. In May 2022, USTR commenced the statutory four-year review process by notifying representatives of domestic industries that benefit from the Section 301 tariffs on imports from the PRC of the possible termination of those actions and of the opportunity for the representatives to request continuation. In September 2022, USTR announced that because requests for continuation were received, the tariff actions had not terminated and USTR would conduct a review of the tariff actions. The statutory review provides an opportunity for USTR to make a full assessment of the Section 301 tariffs and their effectiveness in changing the PRC's behavior and counteracting the PRC's unfair policies and practices. USTR will continue a targeted tariff exclusions process to ensure that our economic interests are being served, and we will keep open the option of further tariff exclusions processes as warranted.

IV. ENGAGING WITH KEY TRADING PARTNERS AND MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS

Growing the middle class, opening new markets, addressing inequality, and incentivizing climate and environmental action are goals we share with many of our trading partners. Working with others to craft trade policies that promote these goals reflects the American leadership that many of our trading partners are seeking, and the Biden-Harris Administration continues to meet the challenge.

Using trade policy as a tool to achieve these shared goals, USTR continues to step up its engagement with partners, allies, multilateral institutions and international organizations. These actors and institutions play a pivotal role in cultivating meaningful outcomes to address shared concerns.

The Biden-Harris Administration has placed a focus on repairing previously strained relationships with partners and allies and recommitted the United States to the world's international institutions. We are applying the principles of our worker-centered trade policy to resolve long-standing disputes, and to create new partnerships and frameworks fit for jointly tackling our greatest shared challenges. We are also leading the effort to revitalize our international institutions to ensure that they effectively address the needs of working people and communities.

President Biden's strategy has already borne fruit, leading to mutually beneficial outcomes that advance the goals of shared prosperity and open the door to still greater cooperation.

A. Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity

The Biden-Harris Administration remains committed to engaging economically with partners in the Indo-Pacific region. In the coming decades, we believe that competitiveness will largely be defined by how well countries are able to harness technology and the coming energy and climate transition to promote inclusive economic growth—and working with our partners and allies in the Indo-Pacific will be critical to achieving these goals.

The Indo-Pacific is one of the most dynamic regions in the world, and it is one of strategic importance to the United States. Additionally, the region is home to some of our closest allies and trading partners, including some with which we have longstanding trade agreements. By working closely with allies and partners to bolster our economic engagement in the Indo-Pacific, we can establish a new path forward that supports the global competitiveness of American workers and businesses and furthers the shared interests of our allies in the years to come.

That is why we launched the IPEF in May 2022. This framework will promote inclusive growth for workers and businesses, advance strong labor standards, and tackle climate change. The framework is also central to the Biden-Harris Administration's economic strategy in the Indo-Pacific and complements our national security goals in the region.

The IPEF is designed to tackle 21st-century challenges and opportunities through four pillars on trade; supply chain resilience; the clean economy; and the fair economy (tax and anticorruption).

Over the last year, the United States, led by USTR, and our diverse group of IPEF partners have been hard at work advancing our shared vision for a high-standard agreement under the Trade Pillar that delivers on the foundational goals that President Biden and other IPEF Leaders laid out when this framework was launched in May 2022. We are working toward an agreement with partners that includes high-standard provisions in a range of areas, including labor; environment; the digital economy; agriculture; good regulatory practices; services domestic regulation; competition policy; trade facilitation; inclusivity; and technical assistance and economic cooperation. We have made considerable and substantial progress on several chapters, and the Biden-Harris Administration is fully committed to continuing this work with our IPEF partners to build on this progress and momentum to fully realize the high standards and tangible benefits of the Trade Pillar.

B. Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity

In our own hemisphere, we are pursuing the Americas Partnership to enhance our strong regional bonds in line with a shared vision for inclusive, people-centered economic growth. In addition to the United States, the founding members of the Americas Partnership are: Barbados, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay. This group represents roughly 90 percent of the Western Hemisphere's gross domestic product and nearly two-thirds of its people.

The Americas Partnership will deepen economic collaboration and integration in our hemisphere and serve as a lasting regional platform to pursue an ambitious, flexible, and goal-oriented economic and development agenda. In November 2023, President Biden hosted the inaugural Leaders' Summit of the Americas Partnership, where he and other leaders identified initial cross-cutting priorities, including: (1) strengthening regional competitiveness and integration; (2) fostering shared prosperity and good governance; (3) building sustainable infrastructure; (4) protecting the climate and environment; and (5) promoting healthy communities.

The United States has deep economic ties in the region, including free trade agreements with nine of our initial partners. Through the Trade Track, USTR will work with our partners to develop inclusive and sustainable approaches to trade and investment that will support regional development and resilient supply chains for goods and services, enhance a predictable and transparent regulatory environment that can boost trade flows, and remove barriers to greater economic integration among our countries. This includes advancing implementation of the WTO Agreement on Trade Facilitation, digitization of customs mechanisms throughout the region, and identification of regulatory actions needed to enhance regional integration and develop mechanisms, actions, and information-sharing tools to ensure that the benefits of trade are more widely shared with micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises and historically underserved and overburdened communities.

USTR is working closely with partner countries to establish a Council on Trade and Competitiveness, which will meet regularly to implement the guidance with respect to trade matters in the East Room Declaration of the Leaders of the Americas Partnership. We expect the Trade Ministers of the Americas Partnership countries to meet in person later this year and then at least once annually.

The Americas Partnership will reflect our values and create formal jobs that lead to decent work and promote internationally recognized labor rights, environmental sustainability, and economic inclusion. Our Administration will continue to consult closely with labor, environmental groups, civil society, industry and businesses, and Congress as we make progress on this important initiative.

C. World Trade Organization

The Biden-Harris Administration is committed to the WTO. Consistent with our approach to trade policy more broadly, our Administration believes the WTO should be a force for good that supports a race to the top and addresses global challenges as they arise.

The WTO was founded on shared values of fair, market-oriented competition, transparency and the rule of law, raising living standards and ensuring full employment, sustainable development, and respect for governments' responsibility to promote our citizens' welfare and security. The United States still believes these fundamental values support peace, prosperity, and economic security. The WTO, however, has not kept pace with the rapidly changing global economy. The WTO must improve its capacity to respond to the needs of everyday people, and urgent reform is critical to support the needs of our society, including on workers' rights, supply chain fragility, and the climate. The inability of current WTO rules to effectively constrain unfair trade and non-market economic practices has only become clearer. In addition, the WTO dispute settlement system needs to be reformed to better fulfill its objective of resolving disputes between Members.

That is why our Administration will continue to collaborate with other WTO Members on a reform agenda that reflects the priorities of our worker-centered approach—one that protects our planet; improves labor standards; advances gender equity, equality, and empowerment; facilitates an inclusive digital economy; and contributes to shared prosperity. This includes enhancing and improving transparency and inclusiveness to drive fact- and evidence-based deliberations to ensure a more relevant and practical approach to addressing current global challenges. This also includes restoring the efficacy of the negotiating arm, advancing an interest-based approach to reforming the dispute settlement functions of the WTO to restore confidence and fairness in the system, and improving the understanding of and respect for Members' WTO commitments. The United States will also continue to partner with other WTO members to better equip the organization to recognize and effectively address the unfair, non-market policies and practices that are at odds with the fundamental premise of market-based competition and create and perpetuate significant global market distortions.

The Biden-Harris Administration understands that change will take time, and we are simultaneously working to deliver results on achievable outcomes through the WTO's existing structure. The United States worked with WTO Members to deliver concrete outcomes during the Twelfth Ministerial Conference in June 2022, including accommodations to the intellectual property rules for COVID-19 vaccines; an extension of the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions; a multilateral agreement on fisheries subsidies disciplines; and a Ministerial Declaration on food insecurity, and a work program to respond to modern sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) challenges to feed a growing global population. Additionally, the United States will continue to collaborate with other WTO Members to improve external engagement practices of the organization and to explore practical steps Members could take to integrate inclusivity into trade and investment policy and the multilateral trading system, including by sharing domestic experiences.

The Thirteenth Ministerial Conference in February 2024 was an important milestone as the first WTO "reform ministerial," but it should not be an endpoint. The United States remains fully committed to the WTO and ensuring the organization fulfills its foundational goals – that trade should raise living standards, ensure full employment, pursue sustainable development, and protect and conserve the environment. The United States will continue engaging with WTO Members in 2024 to make progress on these and other issues and to transform the organization to address the challenges of our time.

D. Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation

As part of our enduring commitment to the region and broad-based economic growth, the United States concluded a successful year as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) host in 2023, with the theme of "Creating a Resilient and Sustainable Future for All." The United States leveraged our host year to collaborate with like-minded partners to showcase the importance of engagement with the APEC region and to advance key U.S. trade priorities. This included advancing tangible work on the importance of sustainability and inclusion in the development and implementation of trade policy.

Our efforts culminated in the adoption of the 2023 APEC Leaders' Golden Gate Declaration, which reflects APEC economies' commitment to keep our markets open, to address supply chain disruptions, and to ensure our trade and investment benefits all of our people and economies. The Declaration also reflects a commitment to accelerate our efforts toward a clean and just energy transition—including tripling renewable energy capacity globally—and to cut in half the digital gender divide by 2030.

APEC Leaders also adopted the San Francisco Principles on Integrating Inclusivity and Sustainability into Trade and Investment Policy, which will guide APEC's trade policy work moving forward to better support inclusive and sustainable outcomes. This builds on APEC's ongoing work and supports our shared commitment toward the achievement of the APEC Putrajaya Vision 2040, including through the implementation of the Aotearoa Plan of Action.

As an incubator of ideas and a catalyst for collaboration, APEC is uniquely positioned to explore how the United States and our partners in the region can work together to build a more durable and resilient global economy. For example, at the APEC Ministers Responsible for Trade meeting in Detroit in May 2023, USTR hosted a first-ever APEC dialogue with labor leaders to discuss how APEC economies can use trade and investment to better empower workers throughout the region. Further, during the APEC Ministers Meeting in San Francisco in November 2023, USTR convened a first-of-its kind meeting between ministers and Indigenous leaders to discuss how to create policies that benefit Indigenous communities, which have been historically overlooked and underserved.

The United States is fully committed to continuing our work with other APEC economies, including with Peru as this year's host, to further embed resiliency, sustainability, and inclusivity as core values in trade policy, including through implementation of the San Francisco Principles, and to advance the needs of workers, consumers, and businesses throughout the region. That includes lifting up workers and women entrepreneurs, empowering small businesses to enter the market, grow, and compete, and using trade to pursue decarbonization and protect our planet. These topics are more important than ever as we continue to face a world full of challenges and uncertainty—the economic fallout from COVID-19, Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, fragile supply chains, growing inequality, and a worsening climate crisis.

E. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also recognized that trade must work for all, and it is another venue that provides the Administration with an opportunity to advance our worker-centered trade agenda.

An ongoing priority for the Biden-Harris Administration is the resolution of long-standing U.S. concerns about discriminatory digital services taxes (DSTs). As part of the historic 2021 OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework's Two-Pillar Solution on global taxation, U.S. trading partners around the globe made a political agreement to withdraw existing DSTs and other similar measures as the global tax reform is implemented, and not to adopt any such new measures that target and discriminate against American companies and their workers. USTR continues to monitor the imposition of DSTs by U.S. trading partners and will evaluate all available options, including under our trade agreements and domestic statutes, if other countries move forward with new measures or fail to withdraw existing measures.

Our engagement in the OECD is also serving to deepen a shared understanding of how the PRC subsidizes key industries and the important role played by the PRC's state-owned enterprises as both the recipients and providers of industrial subsidies. Through innovative analytical tools, the OECD is producing findings that will enable the United States to advance discussions on these critical issues together with like-minded partners.

Further, through the OECD Steel Committee and the Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity, USTR will continue to lead efforts to bring greater transparency and discipline to market-distorting subsidies and other foreign government support measures that contribute to massive and persistent excess capacity in the global steel sector, which distort markets and increase carbon emissions. USTR will also continue to pursue a mutually supportive trade and environment agenda at the OECD, and through its co-lead role to the meetings of the Joint Working Party on Trade and Environment, will advance work on trade and environmental services, circular economy and trade, and enabling reverse supply chains.

F. Bilateral Initiatives

President Biden has used trade policy as a tool to rebuild relationships with partners and to advance a worker-centered trade policy at the same time. Some of these engagements were held under the auspices of existing trade agreements, including free trade agreements and trade and investment framework agreements (TIFAs), while others are negotiations to form new partnerships.

1. India

The United States and India share a dynamic and important trade and investment relationship. In 2021, the United States and India relaunched the United States–India Trade Policy Forum (TPF), which had not met since 2017. Since then, our two governments have intensified our engagement to resolve several WTO disputes and improve market access for several U.S. agricultural products.

In January 2024, the United States and India convened the 14th meeting of the TPF in Delhi, India. Our governments underscored the significance of the TPF in forging robust bilateral trade ties and in enhancing the overall economic relationship and took stock of the significant progress made in addressing concerns impacting the bilateral trade relationship since the 13th TPF held in January 2023. We committed to pursue enhanced engagement leading to mutually beneficial outcomes in several areas, with a view to deepening the trade relationship for the benefit of working people. We identified certain areas, including critical minerals, customs and trade facilitation, supply chains, and trade in high technology products, in which our governments intend to develop an ambitious and forward-looking roadmap for enhanced cooperation in order to achieve economically meaningful outcomes.

The United States will continue to partner with India to tackle shared challenges, build resilient supply chains, and promote a transparent, rules-based trading system for democratic, market economies.

2. European Union

The United States and the EU share an economic relationship of critical importance, as well as the goals of growing the middle class, addressing inequality, and incentivizing responsible environmental stewardship. Geostrategic challenges, including Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine and increased assertiveness of autocratic regimes, have reinforced the importance of our shared democratic values, commitment to universal human rights, and leadership role in upholding the liberal rules-based order. The Biden-Harris Administration believes that a strong U.S.-EU partnership is key to realizing this vision.

2022 and 2023 cemented our progress in cooperating to promote shared goals and manage challenges and irritants. Since Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Administration has worked closely with the EU to hold Russia accountable—including through close coordination on targeted sanctions. We will also continue to partner with the European Union to marshal significant levels of security assistance, humanitarian aid, and direct economic support for Ukraine.

Additionally, through negotiations on the Global Arrangement, we are demonstrating that trading partners can come together and align on common objectives and use trade tools to reduce the emissions intensity of our economies and drive cleaner trade. In 2024, we will continue negotiations with the EU on a forward-looking, high-standard arrangement, while providing predictability and stability to steel and aluminum workers and their families on both sides of the Atlantic.

Since holding the inaugural ministerial meeting of the United States–European Union TTC in September 2021, our officials have met regularly to collaborate on a number of concrete areas, such as challenges posed by non-market policies and practices and economic coercion; avoiding unnecessary barriers to trade in emerging technology products and services; promoting and protecting labor rights and decent work; combatting child and forced labor; expanding resilient and sustainable global supply chains; addressing food security challenges; and tackling the climate crisis.

Specifically, on labor, we have engaged through the Trade and Labor Dialogue to bring together labor, business, and government representatives from both sides of the Atlantic to focus on eliminating forced labor in global supply chains and better incorporating key stakeholder insights into our work.

The Biden-Harris Administration is also using the TTC to cooperate on issues that arise from the development and deployment of new technologies. This cooperation is based on our shared democratic values, including respect for human rights, and, among other things, work to encourage compatible standards and regulations as appropriate, while respecting the sovereign right to regulate.

Additionally, in 2024, we will continue to support the U.S.–European Union Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise (SME) Workshop to identify ways to expand bilateral trade and investment and to enhance broad and inclusive SME participation in that trade and investment.

3. Taiwan

The United States has a long-standing and dynamic trade relationship with Taiwan, a vibrant democracy and important trading partner in the region. Building on this history, in June 2022, the United States and Taiwan launched the United States–Taiwan Initiative on 21st-Century Trade under the auspices of the AIT and TECRO.

Since announcing the negotiating mandate in August 2022, the two sides have pursued an ambitious schedule of meetings to make progress as quickly as possible. In June 2023, AIT and TECRO signed the first agreement under the Initiative. This agreement includes high-standard commitments and economically meaningful outcomes in a number of trade areas, including customs administration and trade facilitation, good regulatory practices, services domestic regulation, anticorruption, and small and medium-sized enterprises.

The United States and Taiwan, under the auspices of AIT and TECRO, will continue negotiating a second agreement covering other economically significant areas. The United States places a high priority on partnering with Taiwan to further deepen and strengthen our trade and investment relationship.

4. Kenya

The United States will continue working with Kenya to deepen our trade and investment relationship, including by advancing worker-centered trade policies and promoting regional and continental economic integration in Africa.

On July 14, 2022, the United States and Kenya launched the STIP. The STIP builds on our cooperation to date and will pursue enhanced engagement leading to high-standard commitments in a wide range of areas with a view to increasing investment; promoting sustainable and inclusive economic growth; benefiting workers, consumers, and businesses (including micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs)); and supporting African regional economic integration.

Since the first round of conceptual discussions in February 2023, our governments have continued discussions on important issues, including: agriculture; anticorruption; digital trade; environment and climate change action; good regulatory practices; MSMEs; workers' rights; supporting participation of women, youth, persons with disabilities, vulnerable populations, and the African Diaspora in trade; standards collaboration; trade facilitation and customs procedures; and services domestic regulation. In 2024, the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to work closely with the Kenyan Government on the STIP so that it can serve as a model for engagement with other willing countries on the African continent.

5. Japan

Japan has long been a valued trading partner of the United States, as well as a close ally. In 2023, the United States and Japan held two meetings of the United States–Japan Partnership on Trade, which reinforces a shared commitment to strengthen the U.S.-Japan alliance through regular engagement, advancing an agenda of cooperation and addressing bilateral trade issues of concern to either side. Through meetings of the Partnership, the United States and Japan continue to engage in depth on specific initiatives and efforts in a range of areas, including labor and environment-related priorities, agriculture, a supportive digital ecosystem for all, third-country concerns, trade facilitation, and multilateral cooperation.

In January 2023, our governments launched a Task Force on the Promotion of Human Rights and International Labor Standards in Supply Chains. Further, in March 2023, the United States and Japan signed a critical minerals agreement, which builds on the Partnership and will strengthen and diversify critical minerals supply chains and promote the adoption of electric vehicle battery technologies. This agreement memorializes the shared commitment of our governments with respect to the critical minerals sector to facilitate trade, promote fair competition and market-oriented conditions for trade in critical minerals, advance robust labor and environmental standards, and cooperate in efforts to ensure secure, transparent, sustainable, and equitable critical minerals supply chains. In 2024, the United States will continue to work with Japan to deepen our cooperation on these and other issues and to advance sustainable, resilient, and inclusive trade policies that lift up our people and economies.

6. Korea

Korea's stature as a valued trading partner and close ally of the United States continues to grow. The United States–Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS) continues to be both a reflection of that close relationship and the foundation upon which we can build to make it even more cooperative. Our governments have met regularly to work on issues such as agriculture trade, customs-related matters, government procurement, and the digital economy. In 2024, the United States and Korea will continue to convene the various committee and working group meetings under KORUS, including the Joint Committee. The United States will also continue to work with Korea to address our shared concerns, such as supply chain challenges, sustainable trade, emerging technologies, the digital economy, and trade facilitation.

7. Singapore

Singapore has long been a critical partner and was the first Asian economy to sign a free trade agreement with the United States. In 2023, following the United States–Singapore Free Trade Agreement Joint Committee Meeting in October 2021, our governments have been meeting regularly to press forward with work on the environment, labor, and supply chains, among other issues. In 2024, the United States and Singapore will take note of the 20th anniversary of our trade agreement and continue our close collaboration on these and other matters.

8. United Kingdom

In 2024, the United States and the United Kingdom will continue to deepen our trade relationship and work to promote trade based on fair competition, address forced labor in supply chains, and address the challenges posed by distortive policies of non-market economies. We will continue efforts in the large civil aircraft Working Group to explore concrete ways to more effectively address the challenge posed by the PRC's non-market policies and practices. We will also continue to work together on reforming and strengthening the WTO so it better serves the lives and livelihood of all people, and also explore ways to boost investment in clean energy technology.

Additionally, in 2024, we will continue to support the United States–United Kingdom Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise (SME) Dialogue to identify ways to expand bilateral trade and investment and to enhance broad and inclusive SME participation in that trade and investment. In October 2023, our governments convened the 7th SME Dialogue, and the United States will continue to expand bilateral trade and investment and identify ways to enhance broader and more inclusive SME participation in trade.

9. African Continental Free Trade Area

The United States will continue to engage with the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) Secretariat to support regional and continental economic integration, attract investment in supply chains within the continent, and improve the livelihoods of African workers, including and especially women and youth under the AfCFTA.

Since signing the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation for Trade and Investment between the United States and the African Continental Free Trade Area in December 2022, the United States and the AfCFTA Secretariat have continued to monitor progress under the MOU, including at the 2023 AGOA Forum. The two sides will meet quarterly to discuss and enhance the trade and economic relationship between the United States and the AfCFTA Secretariat, the AfCFTA State Parties, and related stakeholders.

The Biden-Harris Administration also remains committed to working with the African Union, including the African Union Commission, to meet today's defining challenges and to develop a lasting partnership with the continent. Moreover, we look forward to constructive engagement to further improve AGOA—including how we can increase the utilization rates, particularly among smaller and less-developed countries, as well as ensure that the program's benefits fully reach all segments of society.

V. PROMOTING CONFIDENCE IN TRADE POLICY THROUGH ENFORCEMENT

The Biden-Harris Administration remains committed to vigorously enforcing our trade agreements as a critical element of pushing a global race to the top. Enforcement is a key component of our worker-centered trade policy agenda. We are using all of the tools at our disposal to combat unfair, non-market policies and practices, defend American jobs, and create broad-based and inclusive economic prosperity. American workers and businesses can compete with anyone when the playing field is level and competition is fair, and trade policy is an indispensable tool in achieving those goals. We are shaping a global trading system that enforces labor and environmental standards, protects intellectual property, and ensures that regulations are science-based and predictable.

As discussed above, our Administration has already taken unprecedented action to utilize trade policy as a tool to defend U.S. economic interests. Continuing to vigorously enforce the high standards of the USMCA continues to be a top priority for our Administration in 2024. We continue to utilize the RRM to secure significant, tangible outcomes for workers across different sectors.

The United States will continue to work to address the dairy market access issue with Canada, and we will not hesitate to use all available tools to ensure that U.S. workers and farmers receive the full benefits of the USMCA. We are currently consulting with Mexico to address our concerns with Mexico's measures that undermine American companies and U.S.-produced energy in favor of Mexico's state-owned electrical utility, Comisión Federal de Electricidad (CFE), and state-owned oil and gas company, Petróleos Mexicanos (Pemex). We are also engaged in environmental consultations with Mexico under the USMCA's Environment Chapter relating to the protection of the critically endangered vaquita porpoise, the prevention of illegal fishing, and trafficking of totoaba fish. We will continue to use all available enforcement mechanisms to robustly uphold the USMCA's groundbreaking standards. The United States will continue to engage with Canada and Mexico to ensure that all U.S. goods receive fair treatment and that the regulatory environment is fair and transparent.

We are also actively deploying domestic enforcement tools to protect our economic interests.

USTR's Special 301 Report highlights the adequacy and effectiveness of U.S. trading partners' protection and enforcement of intellectual property (IP) rights. IP-intensive industries support more than 60 million U.S. jobs—from the independent inventor just starting out to the documentary filmmaker studying critical social issues. Robust protection and enforcement in foreign countries help protect these jobs and ensure that Americans can fairly compete in global marketplaces.

Similarly, the 2023 Notorious Markets List, released on January 30, 2024, is worker-centered in its focus. It identifies examples of online and physical markets that reportedly engage in or facilitate substantial copyright piracy or trademark counterfeiting. Consistent with the Administration's worker-centered trade policy, this year's publication highlights potential health and safety risks posed by counterfeit goods.

In addition, our Administration will continue to administer its preference programs in line with our worker-centered agenda and in accordance with the statutory eligibility criteria. As a result of the latest AGOA eligibility review, which included a public hearing, President Biden announced that, as of January 1, 2024, the United States had terminated the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda from the program.

The designations of Gabon and Niger as AGOA beneficiaries were terminated due to concerns with political pluralism and the rule of law. The designation of the Central African Republic was terminated due to concerns with the rule of law, political pluralism, worker rights, and gross violations of internationally recognized human rights perpetrated by the government. The designation of Uganda was terminated due to gross violations of internationally recognized human rights perpetrated by the government. At the same time, the President also reinstated eligibility for Mauritania. USTR will continue to monitor democratic governance, worker rights, and human rights developments for AGOA beneficiary countries and use the eligibility review process to raise those issues. The United States remains committed to working with trading partners who are terminated from the AGOA program in an effort to support their efforts to meet the clear statutory benchmarks for reinstatement.

The United States also opposes acts, policies and practices by foreign countries that are intended to undervalue their currencies in order to gain an unfair competitive advantage over American businesses and workers. Under the Biden-Harris Administration, the U.S. Government has deployed the full range of available tools to put effective pressure on countries that have been judged to intervene excessively in the foreign exchange market. Our Administration remains committed to examining the currency practices of all major U.S. trading partners and holding them to account as necessary.

The Biden-Harris Administration will continue to monitor the practices of our trading partners and hold them accountable for meeting the standards established under our trade agreements. Further, we will also continue to review our existing trade tools, identify ways to strengthen them, and create new tools as necessary to achieve meaningful results that level the playing field for U.S. workers and businesses. In 2024, we will continue to work with Congress to fully evaluate the efficacy of our current trade tools and identify areas where new tools may be needed.

VI. PROMOTING EQUITABLE, INCLUSIVE, AND DURABLE TRADE POLICY AND EXPANDING STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

Trade policy, when done correctly, can play a critical role in advancing equitable and resilient economic growth for all communities, including underserved, marginalized, and overburdened communities, here in the United States and with trading partners who share concerns about rising inequality. The Biden-Harris Administration remains committed to thorough and thoughtful engagement as we develop and implement the President's trade policy agenda.

Inclusive engagement is a key component to ensuring that our resulting trade policies are durable and equitable, and to building trusted, sustained lines of communication with those communities that will be affected by those decisions. As such, the Biden-Harris Administration will continue to expand the tables we set and meet with communities across the country—including Tribal nations, Indigenous communities, and Black, Latino, Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander communities, rural and remote regions, working class communities, micro and small businesses, and youth, labor, civil, and human rights organizations—to ensure that the voices of all stakeholders are heard and respected as we evaluate and make these decisions.

A. Promoting Equitable, Inclusive, and Durable Trade Policy

In strengthening the nation's competitiveness and expanding the benefits of trade, racial and gender equity are core elements of U.S. trade and investment policy. An intersectional, interconnected framework is particularly important in emerging sectors where the United States has the potential to be competitive and create well-paying U.S.-based jobs through trade. For these reasons, many of President Biden's first actions directed the whole-of-government to embed equity in their policy goals, objectives, and outcomes.

As a result, the 2023 Annual Trade Report includes updates on USTR initiatives to advance racial and gender equity in U.S. trade policy. In addition, all U.S. trade policy tools, engagements, and new trade initiatives incorporate and reflect the core principles outlined in the Executive Orders on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government and Worker Organizing and Empowerment, Revitalizing Our Nation's Commitment to Environmental Justice for All, the United States' historic, first National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality, and the Presidential Memoranda on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships and on Advancing the Human Rights of LGBTQI+ Persons around the World.

In particular, in April 2022, USTR released its Equity Action Plan, developed in accordance with President Biden's Executive Order on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government. Through an intersectional, interconnected, whole-of-agency approach, the Plan includes incorporating equity, including racial and gender equity, and environmental justice into the following trade and investment-related policy actions: (1) annual public updates on strategies and activities; (2) strengthening data to consider and improve the distributional effects of trade; (3) advisory committee administration, including questions posed to cleared advisors, training, and guidance; and (4) expanded and consistent USTR engagement with underserved and marginalized communities. In June 2023, USTR published an unprecedented Federal Register Notice (FRN) inviting public comments and recommendations on how all U.S. trade and investment policy actions, including responsible business conduct, could advance racial and gender equity and support for historically underserved communities. USTR will continue to use the responses to inform the development of inclusive, worker-centered trade policy.

USTR leveraged the U.S. APEC host year to amplify our Administration's vision for inclusive economic growth. The Ministers Responsible for Trade meeting in Detroit and the APEC Ministers Meeting in San Francisco featured first-of-its-kind ministerial-level dialogues with labor and Indigenous leaders, respectively. By connecting APEC Ministers directly with labor and Indigenous leaders, USTR placed fair and inclusive trade and investment policies front and center throughout our APEC host year. USTR worked to center the role of trade in advancing economic inclusion for underrepresented groups in minister- and leader-level APEC statements, including through Ministers' recognition of the role of trade in implementing APEC's La Serena Roadmap for Women and Inclusive Growth, and Leader-level agreement to the San Francisco Principles, which will further guide APEC's work going forward. In addition, USTR announced that the United States is exploring observership in the Indigenous Peoples Economic and Trade Cooperation Arrangement (IPETCA), as a result of Tribal consultations and engagements with Indigenous leaders and communities.

Additionally, U.S. Trade Representative Tai continues to play a constructive, active role as the co-chair of the White House Initiative and President's Advisory Commission on Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders, and as a member of the Gender Policy Council and White House Council on Native American Affairs (WHCNAA). On January 17, 2023, the White House convened federal government officials and community leaders to release the Biden-Harris Administration's first-ever National Strategy to Advance Equity, Justice, and Opportunity for Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander (AA and NHPI) Communities. The National Strategy includes detailed plans from thirty-two federal agencies, including USTR, which build on the Administration's previous actions to promote safety and equity for AA and NHPI communities.

Further, data continues to be critical to informing our work with like-minded partners to advance inclusive growth and trade policy. In October 2021, USTR requested that the USITC conduct an independent, two-part investigation of the distributional effects of goods and services trade and trade policy on U.S. workers by skill, wage and salary level, gender, race/ethnicity, age, and income level, especially as they affect underrepresented and underserved communities.

On November 14, 2022, the USITC released its report cataloging information on the distributional effects of trade and trade policy on underrepresented and underserved communities. The USITC report confirmed that trade did have a negative and disproportionate impact on certain demographic groups, especially on Black, Hispanic, and other nonwhite workers, and workers without a college degree. The report also found that there was a lack of disaggregated data and limited research on the effects of trade and trade policy on other ethnic groups, including American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islanders.

This is why, in 2023, USTR requested that the USITC repeat the distributional effects investigation every three years for the next 15 years. Consequently, policymakers, researchers, and the public will be able to monitor and ensure progress in closing data and research gaps and gathering the necessary information to assess the distributional effects of trade and trade policy on U.S. workers, especially in underrepresented and underserved communities. USTR also continues to work with U.S. statistical agencies to achieve better access to restricted data for researchers. The USITC report confirmed the need for U.S. trade policy to work better and benefit more Americans. Our Administration is working to ensure that we continue to develop the tools that will enable us to improve our policies to deliver more inclusive economic outcomes through trade.

Accordingly, in 2024, USTR will continue to explore opportunities for data collection, research, and analysis to assess and improve the distributional effects of trade and use the results of the USITC's investigation to advance inclusive growth, economic resilience and competitiveness, and data needs in U.S. trade policy, including supporting efforts to close data gaps and improving data accessibility, granularity, and scope.

B. Engagement and Consultation with Partners and Stakeholders

The Biden-Harris Administration recognizes Congress' important role in crafting U.S. trade and investment policy. We welcome and seek guidance and feedback from Members of Congress to share their views and constituents' priorities regarding trade policy. USTR consults with Congressional committees and the leadership of both parties in the U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives, holds meetings and calls with Members and their staff, participates in Congressional hearings and leads congressional delegations overseas to meet with trading partners and multilateral organizations. USTR also engages Members of Congress in their districts and states meeting with constituents, including workers, farmers, ranchers, producers, and community-based stakeholders. In addition, we share negotiating text with Members of Congress and appropriately cleared staff prior to sharing it with stakeholders outside of the federal government or with foreign countries. In 2024, the Administration will continue to actively engage with Congress and work with Members to ensure their feedback informs trade policy.

Additionally, the Biden-Harris Administration is committed to engaging with a wide range of diverse stakeholders—including historically marginalized and underserved communities, minority-serving institutions, and civil and human rights organizations—as we develop and implement our trade policy agenda. USTR will continue connecting with stakeholders with diverse perspectives and experiences throughout the country to listen, learn, and build trusted relationships and lines of communication to develop inclusive policy that delivers equitable results.

Our Administration has also regularly consulted and briefed the 28 advisory committees that USTR manages and co-leads as we seek input from labor unions, environmental groups, consumer groups, nongovernmental organizations, state and local governments, industry, and academia. In addition to seeking cleared advisor feedback on how to improve the administration of advisory committees, USTR will continue to explore how advisory committees may better consider and advise on advancing innovative, equitable trade and investment policy, and encourage diverse and inclusive perspectives to apply to serve on trade advisory committees.