I. INTRODUCTION

The Biden Administration recognizes that trade can––and should––be a force for good. Done right, and in coordination with other policy disciplines, it can grow the middle class, redress inequality, and level the playing field by promoting fair competition. We remain committed to upholding a fair and open global trading system – one that follows through on our trading partners' longstanding commitment to conduct economic relations with a view to raising standards of living, ensuring full employment, and promoting sustainable development.

To realize these goals, we must take stock of what has worked and what has not. This requires us to identify and rethink aspects of the existing trading system that incentivize or enable unfair competition.

Competition in a global market provides Americans access to a wider variety of goods and services at competitive prices. But, too often our existing global trade rules have rewarded advantages that are not based on fair competition – or American values more broadly. Consumers in the global marketplace are also wage earners and producers, and members of broader communities that feel the effects of our trade policies. A trade model that promotes exploitation, whether of workers or the environment, is not efficient – it is a form of unfair competition. And it is not sustainable.

For these reasons, the Administration continues to advance its worker-centered trade policy. We are standing up for workers' rights – but it is more than that. We are promoting a broader agenda of fair competition to ensure that workers are competing on the basis of skills and creativity, not exploitative cost advantages. We are laser-focused on working with partners and allies to chart new trade rules that do more to advance decarbonization and other critical environmental standards, support U.S. farmers, promote sustainable and resilient supply chains, and combat the COVID-19 pandemic. Through this approach, we can harness fair competition and support the American middle class with increased prosperity while promoting core American values.

As President Biden has explained, "[We] will pursue new rules of global trade and economic growth that strive to level the playing field so that it's not artificially tipped in favor of any one country at the expense of others, and every nation has a right and the opportunity to compete fairly."

Exploitation of workers and the environment are not the only forms of unfair practices that distort global trade at the expense of Americans. We must recognize that China, as a large, non-market economy, has uniquely distorted global trade through its economic policies and practices, causing harm to U.S. production, investment, and even consumption. In many ways, China's integration into the global trading system has highlighted weaknesses in the current system – and the urgent need for reform. Lack of protections for workers, a weak environmental regime, and anticompetitive subsidies are the hallmarks of China's artificial comparative advantage. It is an advantage that puts others out of business and violates any notion of fair competition.

That's why the Biden Administration is realigning our trade policies towards China to defend the interests of America's workers and businesses to strengthen our middle-class, create shared sustainable growth, and spur resilient climate action. We are working to counter China's unfair economic practices, including by raising our concerns directly with China and working with our partners and allies to address shared challenges.

2 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

We know we cannot effectively advance our worker-centered trade policy alone. Many of our partners and allies share our goal of a fairer, more sustainable international economic regime, and we are steadily forging the partnerships necessary to update and enforce the rules governing the global economy and trade. One example is the Administration's success in rallying the world behind a Global Minimum Tax on corporations to address yet another race to the bottom that, among other things, has deprived the United States of resources that should rightfully allow for investment in communities here at home. Another is the deal we reached with the European Union (EU) to combat global oversupply in the steel and aluminum industry and negotiate a first-of-its-kind trade arrangement predicating market access on the greenhouse gas emissions of imported steel and aluminum. A third example is the agreements we reached with the EU and the UK to resolve the longstanding aircraft disputes involving Boeing and Airbus, which allowed us to move past a perennial irritant and focus on shared interests, including financing on market terms and the challenges posed by non-market economies. We are building on this momentum to advance broader goals of fair competition through all available avenues, whether bilateral, regional, or multilateral discussions; existing trade agreements and frameworks; or new initiatives. Where the scope of the challenge requires new tools, we will pursue them as well.

A vital element of our effort to build an inclusive trade policy agenda is understanding the effects of our policies on underrepresented and underserved workers and communities, and ensuring that they have a say in how our policies are designed going forward. A more inclusive framework will lead to more durable trade policy. Approaches to trade that rest on a narrow base of support are unsustainable, and could ultimately undermine U.S. leadership at a critical juncture. While our ambition is high, we are rising to the challenge.

Precisely because it is focused on workers as the engine of the global economy, the Biden Administration's trade policy will be a force for good – and will lead to a more durable, stable, and resilient trading system.

II. ADVANCING A WORKER-CENTERED TRADE POLICY

A. Standing Up for Workers' Rights

The Biden Administration's worker-centered trade policy reflects our commitment to use our trade agreements, tools, and relationships to empower workers. We are working with our trading partners to support workers' rights and stop the global race to the bottom. We will seek to establish new, high-standard commitments on labor rights under our current and new frameworks for trade. Strengthening labor rights will benefit American workers, as well as workers all over the world.

One of our top priorities is effective implementation and enforcement of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA). The Agreement includes the strongest labor provisions in any trade agreement ever, as well as a ground-breaking enforcement tool, the rapid response mechanism (RRM). The RRM allows the United States to quickly take action and target specific facilities in Mexico where workers are being denied their rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining.

In 2021, the United States successfully used the mechanism to secure concrete wins for workers in two different instances.

The Biden Administration self-initiated the first-ever request for review under the RRM in May 2021, concerning a General Motors facility in Silao, Mexico. On February 3, 2022, workers at the plant overwhelmingly voted in favor of a new union to represent their interests and to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement with the company. This outcome shows that new tools can help us work with allies and trading partners––such as Mexico––to reverse the race to the bottom.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 3

The United States also requested a review under the RRM pursuant to a petition filed by the AFL-CIO, SEIU, Public Citizen, and SNITIS (a Mexican union) alleging a denial of workers' rights at a Tridonex automotive parts facility in Matamoros, Mexico. In this instance, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) negotiated an extensive set of commitments with Tridonex, including severance and backpay for a large number of former Tridonex workers, as well as a commitment that the company will remain neutral in future union representation elections.

These two actions form a strong foundation for our ongoing work to advance labor rights in 2022. The U.S. Department of Labor, working with USTR, will continue to support workers on the ground and work with the Government of Mexico to closely monitor situations that may involve violations of workers' rights.

In 2021, the Administration undertook several efforts that will provide the foundation for further action in 2022 to advance workers' rights and create sustainable growth.

• USTR introduced as part of the ongoing fisheries subsidies negotiations at the World Trade Organization (WTO) a proposal to address the use of forced labor on fishing vessels. The Administration sees the continued acceptance and use of forced labor and its association with illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing as a fundamental test of the credibility of the trading system and will continue to press WTO members to address this issue in 2022.

• The Biden Administration fought hard to elevate the problem of forced labor in supply chains with our trading partners. The Group of 7 Trade Ministers' communiqué expresses a shared desire for member countries to work together, along with businesses, to combat this problem. The communiqué is based on international standards and reflects the U.S. Government toolkit that has been cultivated over the last 25 years to combat this harmful practice. The United States will continue to work with our trading partners to highlight, and spur progress on, the scourge of forced labor.

• Tackling forced labor will also require cooperation and leadership from the private sector. In July 2021, the United States issued an updated advisory for U.S. businesses whose supply chains run through Xinjiang, China, where the Government of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and associated enterprises continue to subject Uyghurs and other ethnic and religious minorities to forced labor. The United States will continue to work with industry to rid supply chains of forced labor, and hold bad actors accountable.

• On January 14, 2022, the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act entered into force. This law will support USTR's efforts to eliminate the use of forced labor. USTR will continue to work with the U.S. Government's Forced Labor Enforcement Task Force, including U.S. Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Department of Labor, to monitor and block the importation of goods made in whole, or in part, with forced labor.

• On January 25, 2022, USTR announced that it will develop its first-ever focused trade strategy to combat forced labor. It will include a thorough interagency review of USTR's existing trade policies and tools to combat forced labor, to determine areas that may need strengthening, and to identify gaps that need to be filled. USTR will undertake an inclusive process that maximizes input from stakeholders, including labor organizations, civil society, survivors, and the private sector.

The Biden Administration is also bringing its worker-centered trade policy and commitment to fair competition to other multilateral fora and to allies bilaterally. USTR chaired the trade session on "Making

4 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

Trade Work for All" at the 60th Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Ministerial Council Meeting. USTR is calling upon other regional and multilateral organizations, such as Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), and the WTO and its Members to consider how they can more effectively hear from workers and be relevant in addressing the needs of regular people. We are also advancing our worker-centered trade policy with the EU in the U.S.–EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC). Discussions there include analyzing the impact of technology on labor markets, working conditions, and worker rights.

In 2022 and beyond, the United States will continue advocating for workers' rights on the world stage and collaborating with our partners and allies to improve outcomes for workers across the globe. Trading partners should compete on the merits, not on the basis of exploitation. Through the Biden Administration's efforts to promote fair competition, we are leveling the playing field for American workers.

B. Accelerating Decarbonization and Promoting Sustainable Environmental Practices

Combating the climate crisis and promoting sustainable environmental practices are top priorities for the Biden Administration. For many years, trade has been seen as exacerbating these challenges. The same dynamic that has created a race to the bottom with respect to labor rights also exists with respect to environmental protection.

However, the Biden Administration understands trade is an indispensable tool in addressing the climate crisis. The traditional approach to climate and environmental issues within trade has primarily focused on advancing levels of environmental protection for our trading partners. The Biden Administration will continue this work and strive to strengthen and expand those commitments, but we also recognize that this singular approach will not achieve our climate goals. To this end, the Administration is pursuing a new generation of trade policies that will more affirmatively promote the decarbonization necessary to limit global temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius.

New Agreements and Approaches to Advancing Our Climate Goals and Protecting the Environment

Last year, the United States and the EU jointly announced their commitment to negotiate the world's first emissions-based sectoral arrangement on steel and aluminum trade. Together, the United States and EU are working to restrict access to their markets for dirty steel, as well as to countries that dump steel in both markets, contributing to worldwide over-supply. The arrangement will drive investment in green steel and aluminum production in the United States, Europe, and around the world, reducing emissions in two of the most carbon-intensive industrial sectors and ensuring a competitive U.S. steel and aluminum industry for decades to come.

The agreement is proof that trade policy is an important part of our climate agenda, and that effective climate action can––and must––support good-paying, quality jobs. It is also a first in the fight against climate change: never have two global partners aligned their trade policies to confront the joint threats of climate change and global market distortions, ensuring that trade works to solve the challenges of the 21st century.

In 2022, we will encourage like-minded trading partners to work with us to address the emissions intensity of steel and aluminum production and non-market excess capacity in the steel and aluminum sectors. We will continue to use the range of available tools to address trade that degrades the environment, demonstrating that a worker-centered trade policy is a critical part of achieving the United States' ambitious climate goals.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 5

Through regional engagements, such as the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework, we will pursue opportunities to maintain and improve environmental protection of our trading partners and increase climate ambition, including to decarbonize our respective economies. We will seek to enable and mobilize the technologies, public and private investment, and technical resources needed to scale up clean energy infrastructure and facilitate trade in climate-friendly goods, services, and technologies, while generating high-quality jobs that power economic growth and advance our Paris Agreement commitments.

The United States will also continue working in 2022 to address unsustainable and illegal fishing practices that are destroying the marine ecosystem. As the WTO continues to host negotiations to discipline harmful fisheries subsidies, the United States is committed to working with all WTO members to finally reach a meaningful conclusion to these negotiations to improve the sustainability of our fisheries resources and the lives of fishers. The Biden Administration has engaged intensively with Members to advance these negotiations during this past year and will continue to do so in 2022.

The United States also seeks to protect our oceans and marine resources, and those whose livelihoods depend on them, from the harm caused by plastic pollution. In 2022, the United States will support the launch of multilateral negotiations on an international agreement to combat ocean plastic pollution. The Biden Administration recognizes the key role that trade plays as both a contributor to the problem of ocean plastic pollution, and its potential to serve as an important part of the solution.

Additionally, the United States will continue to support and promote more circular and resource-efficient approaches in other international fora, including the WTO's Committee on Trade and Environment and the Trade and Environmental Sustainability Structured Discussions, and at the OECD. In the APEC forum, we are leading a Recyclable Materials Policy Program under the Committee on Trade and Investment. We will continue to support and expand this work, to help develop the capacity of APEC economies to identify and frame domestic policies that promote solid waste management and recycling infrastructure.

Enforcing Environmental Standards Through Existing Agreements and Tools

We will also take innovative approaches through our existing tools to advance our climate and environment goals. For example, unsustainable deforestation is another critical environmental concern that we seek to address. Illegally-harvested timber has no place in our supply chains: it not only harms the environment and depletes natural resources, but is yet another form of unfair competition, disadvantaging U.S. workers and businesses who use lawful and sustainable means to make their goods.

That's why the Biden Administration is committed to using our trade tools to address this important issue. In October of last year, the United States announced an agreement with the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (Vietnam) that addresses U.S. concerns in the Vietnam Timber Section 301 investigation. This was the first Section 301 investigation to address environmental concerns, and the agreement secures commitments that will help keep illegally harvested or traded timber out of the supply chain and protect the environment and natural resources.

Going forward, the Biden Administration will monitor Vietnam's implementation of this agreement. We will also work to identify other trading partners that engage in practices related to the import and use of illegal timber. As needed, the Biden Administration is prepared to take action to address serious environmental concerns with other trading partners.

The USMCA provides an important example of how trade policy, when done right, is a powerful tool to advance responsible climate action. The Agreement includes the most comprehensive environmental commitments of any U.S. trade agreement, including critical provisions to address wildlife trafficking,

6 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

illegal logging and fishing, fisheries subsidies, marine litter, and air and water pollution. The Biden Administration is using the full range of tools at its disposal to confront these issues.

On February 10, 2022, the United States launched consultations with Mexico under the USMCA Environment Chapter regarding Mexico's obligations to effectively enforce its fisheries-related laws, regulations, and other measures designed to prevent illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing in the Upper Gulf of California, to prevent trafficking of protected species such as the totoaba fish, and to protect and conserve the critically endangered vaquita porpoise.

The United States is also collaborating with key trading partners such as Kenya to forge new partnerships that promote a sustainable trade agenda, while working collaboratively at the WTO, through our trade agreements, and in other regional and multilateral fora to support net-zero economies. Under the U.S.–EU TTC Climate and Clean Tech working group, which USTR co-leads, we will work with the European Union to collaboratively advance trans-Atlantic priorities to address climate change.

C. Supporting U.S. Agriculture

The Biden Administration understands the importance of trade to U.S. farmers, ranchers, fishers, and food manufacturers. From 2000 to 2021, annual U.S. agricultural exports grew from $58 billion to $183 billion.

Through our commitment to creating sustainable economic growth and establishing a level playing field, USTR is preserving and building on those gains. The Biden Administration is also focused on creating new opportunities for American agriculture, including using our existing Trade and Investment Framework Agreements (TIFAs) and Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) to support U.S. agriculture exports.

U.S. farmers are integral to the Biden Administration's worker-centered trade policy, and they will see more open trade in 2022 as a result of our early successes and similar ongoing efforts.

• In 2021, the United States concluded negotiations with the United Kingdom (UK) and the European Union on tariff rate quota (TRQ) commitments to account for the withdrawal of the UK from the EU customs union. The outcome provides greater predictability for U.S. exporters, and resulted in favorable outcomes on products such as pork, beef, rice, wheat, corn and grape juice.

• Due to the successful revitalization of the United States–India Trade Policy Forum, the Government of India agreed in December 2021 to allow imports of U.S. pork and pork products into India, removing a longstanding barrier to U.S. agricultural trade. In 2022, USTR will continue to work with India to finalize market access for cherries and alfalfa hay.

• During the August 2021 visit of Vice President Harris to Vietnam, the Government of Vietnam announced reductions in the tariff rates for frozen pork, corn, and all classes of wheat. These reductions will allow U.S. pork, corn and wheat greater access to the Vietnamese market, in line with competitors.

• Following engagements with the Philippines, including a TIFA Agriculture Working Group meeting and subsequent consultations, the Philippines lowered its tariff rates on imported fresh, chilled, and frozen pork and increased quota volumes for imports of such products, and lowered its tariffs on certain chicken and turkey products.

• In July 2021, the United States and Colombia finalized an exchange of letters under the United States–Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement that clarifies requirements on Colombia's

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 7

certificates of origin accompanying U.S. corn exports to Colombia. The exchange of letters eliminated bureaucratic requirements for U.S. exporters and secured continued access to the fourth largest U.S. corn export market, valued at approximately $875 million annually.

• Additionally, USTR and the U.S. Department of Agriculture collaborated closely with U.S. dairy producers to engage with Colombia's investigating authority in a safeguard investigation into import of U.S. milk powder, valued at approximately $82 million in 2021. In December 2021, Colombia announced that it concluded its investigation and found that implementation of a safeguard was not justified.

Enforcement also plays a critical role in promoting predictability and leveling the playing field in agricultural trade. The Biden Administration will continue enforcing our existing agreements so U.S. producers can compete in the global market; upgrading and expanding trade frameworks to deliver new opportunities; and promoting sustainable agricultural practices through our trade policy.

For example, in May 2021, the United States requested and established the first dispute settlement panel under the USMCA to review whether Canada violated its dairy commitments under the USMCA. Specifically, we challenged Canada's dairy TRQ allocation measures that undermine the value of the TRQs by setting aside and reserving access to in-quota quantities exclusively for Canadian processors, thereby denying American dairy farmers the ability to sell their products to Canadian consumers. In December 2021, the United States prevailed in this proceeding, with the panel agreeing that Canada had breached its USMCA commitments.

This historic win demonstrates the Biden Administration's commitment to ensuring that our trade agreements benefit American workers, including farmers, and it will ensure that the U.S. dairy industry receives the full benefits of the USMCA to market and sell U.S. products to Canadian consumers. In 2022, the Biden Administration will continue using our enforcement tools to ensure that our trading partners deliver on their commitments and that U.S. agricultural producers receive the benefits negotiated in existing FTAs.

We will continue leveling the playing field for U.S. farmers by monitoring the treatment of U.S. agriculture biotechnology products and advocating for fair and science-based treatment of these products by our trading partners. USTR will also monitor the practices of other trading partners to ensure that U.S. agricultural products are not subject to unfair, unjustified, or discriminatory restrictions.

D. Bolstering Supply Chain Resiliency

Bolstering supply chain resiliency is a critical component of the Biden Administration's efforts to advance our worker-centered trade policy and create sustainable economic growth.

Supply chains are integral to the global trading system, and the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated global economic disruption have highlighted major vulnerabilities in our existing supply chains, as well as underscored the importance of promoting supply chain resiliency.

To begin addressing these challenges, President Biden signed Executive Order 14017 (America's Supply Chains) last year, directing a whole-of-government approach to assess vulnerabilities in, and strengthen the resilience of, critical U.S. supply chains. Pursuant to the Executive Order, the Biden Administration conducted a 100-day review for four priority product areas: semiconductors, large capacity batteries, critical minerals and materials, and pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients.

8 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

Following the recommendations that emerged from the 100-day reports, the Biden Administration established an interagency Supply Chain Trade Task Force led by USTR. This task force is directed to identify both unfair foreign trade practices that have eroded U.S. critical supply chains and opportunities to use U.S. trade agreements and future trade agreements to strengthen the collective supply chain resilience of the United States and our trade partners.

Over the next year, the Biden Administration will continue its work to strengthen supply chains to promote economic security, national security, good-paying jobs, and the health of small- and medium-sized businesses, with strong standards for environmental sustainability and community engagement. Steps to address identified supply chain vulnerabilities and develop the foundation for increased resilience will be an important component of the United States' ongoing engagement with its trade partners.

E. Combating the COVID-19 Pandemic

Consistent with our trade policy agenda that recognizes that people are the core of our economy, USTR is working closely with a number of agencies to ensure that trade rules support, and do not impede, the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Biden Administration is taking a whole-of-government approach to address the pandemic, at home and abroad. These efforts include COVID-19 vaccine donations through COVAX and other fora, investment in vaccine production and delivery infrastructure in underserved regions, and working with trading partners to identify obstacles and solutions to vaccination efforts – including through supporting a waiver of intellectual property protections for COVID-19 vaccines at the WTO, as well as measures to facilitate the flow of goods necessary to fight the pandemic.

III. RE-ALIGNING THE U.S.–CHINA TRADE RELATIONSHIP

The U.S.–China economic and trade relationship is one of profound consequence. As the two largest economies in the world, the bilateral relationship affects not just the two participants, but the entire globe.

The Biden Administration acknowledges that this relationship is complex and competitive. With respect to trade, competition must be fair. China's approach to trade drives frictions in many of China's trade relationships – not just ours. China, as a large, non-market economy, is uniquely able to distort the marketplace through unfair, anticompetitive practices, which harm workers and businesses in the United States and in other countries, including some of our closest allies and partners. By unduly concentrating production of certain goods in China, these non-market policies and practices also undermine supply chain resilience and harm consumers that, in the long run, are deprived of the innovation and choice that fair competition would produce.

To successfully counter the range of threats posed by China, we must be frank about the challenges we face.

China employs a wide array of unfair, distortive measures that provide substantial support to Chinese industries across the economy, often in pursuit of specific aims in terms of production, capabilities, and market share. China has also limited market access for imported goods and services and restricted the ability of foreign manufacturers and services suppliers to do business in China. Further, it has used various, often illicit, means to secure foreign intellectual property and technology to pursue its industrial policy objectives.

China fails to provide its people with the most basic of labor rights, including the right to organize and bargain collectively. Low operating costs resulting from artificially low wages and poor worker protections remain some of the key reasons why companies have chosen to offshore production there. Moreover, the

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 9

use of state-sponsored forced labor, including in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, is an affront to human dignity and a further example of China's unfair economic practices. Similarly, China's environmental policies make it a manufacturing destination of choice for production processes that would be barred in other countries.

China's unfair, non-market practices are also reflected in its approach to the environment, including: its weak environmental regulation and enforcement; subsidies that contribute to overfishing; illegal fishing practices; decimation of the infrastructure for recyclable commodities through a vast web of import bans; and overproduction of industrial goods. Beyond anticompetitive behavior, China's policies are otherwise harmful to the environment. Of note is China's tolerance of imports of illegally harvested wildlife products, which enables a major source of demand.

The Biden Administration is taking a new, holistic, and pragmatic approach to our relationship grounded in the principles of our worker-centered trade policy. We are clear-eyed about China's doubling down on its harmful trade and economic abuses. We are also mindful that rash response measures can create vulnerabilities of their own. The Biden Administration's approach to China is and will continue to be deliberative, with a focus on the long term.

It starts with the groundbreaking domestic investments enacted through the President's Build Back Better agenda, which allow the United States to engage and compete with China from a position of strength. In addition, we are taking steps to build supply chain resilience that will protect American workers and consumers from the harms wrought by China's trade and economic abuses. We are also considering all existing tools––and will potentially seek new ones as needed––to combat the harms of China's state-led, non-market practices.

Critically, we are bringing renewed focus to engagement with our partners and allies, who also suffer harm from China's unfair trade and economic practices. We share values and an essential interest in fair, market-based competition. The ability to defend against unfair Chinese practices requires that market economies act in concert to confront policies and practices that are fundamentally at odds with a global trading system based on market competition.

Moreover, the use of forced labor in supply chains is not simply an extreme form of unfair competition, but a moral stain. Consistent with the statutory ban on the importation of goods made in whole or in part with forced labor, the Administration issued an updated Xinjiang Supply Chain business advisory in 2021. Going forward, the Biden Administration will continue holding China accountable for its use of state-sponsored forced labor and working with our trading partners to eradicate the use of forced labor throughout global supply chains. This includes continued implementation and enforcement of the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act.

As we take these steps, we are mindful of the effects that trade actions can have on American businesses and workers. USTR has restarted a targeted tariff exclusions process to ensure that our economic interests are being served, and we will keep open the option of further tariff exclusions processes as warranted.

The Biden Administration understands that durable coexistence requires engagement as well as accountability. We are steadfastly working through the challenges ahead to deliver meaningful results for the American people. Above all else, we will use the full range of tools in our economic toolbox––and develop new tools where necessary––to steadfastly defend our interests and those of other market economies that seek fair competition.

10 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

IV. ENGAGING WITH KEY TRADING PARTNERS AND MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS

Growing the middle glass, redressing inequality, and incentivizing climate and environmental action are goals we share with many of our trading partners. Working with others to craft trade policies that promote these goals reflects the American leadership that many of our trading partners are seeking. The Biden Administration is meeting the challenge.

Using trade policy as a tool to achieve these shared goals, USTR is stepping up its engagement with partners, allies, multilateral institutions and organizations. These actors and institutions play a pivotal role in cultivating any meaningful outcomes to address shared concerns. But to achieve a more resilient and just global economy, reform is necessary. The policies of the past contributed to contemporary challenges; we need different policies to achieve a different outcome.

Recognizing these shared goals, and the importance of working with others to achieve them, the Biden Administration is repairing strained relationships with partners and allies and recommitting the United States to the world's international institutions. We are applying the principles of our worker-centered trade policy to resolve long-standing disputes, and to creating new partnerships and frameworks fit for jointly tackling our greatest shared challenges. We are also recommitting to and revitalizing our international institutions to ensure that they effectively address the needs of everyday people.

President Biden's strategy has already borne fruit, leading to mutually beneficial outcomes that advance the goals of shared prosperity and open the door to still greater cooperation.

A. Indo-Pacific Economic Framework

The Biden Administration is committed to engaging economically with partners in the Indo-Pacific region. In the coming decades, we believe that competitiveness will largely be defined by how well countries are able to harness technology and digital sectors of our economies and the coming energy and climate transition to promote inclusive growth – and working with our partners and allies in the Indo-Pacific will be critical to achieving these goals. The Indo-Pacific is one of the most dynamic regions in the world, and it is one of strategic importance to the United States. Additionally, the region is home to some of our closest allies and trading partners, including some with which we have longstanding trade agreements. By working closely with allies and partners to bolster our economic engagement in the Indo-Pacific, we can establish a new path forward that supports the global competitiveness of American workers and businesses and further the shared interests of our allies in the years to come.

That is why President Biden announced in October 2021 that the United States is developing an Indo-Pacific Economic Framework to deepen economic relationships with allies and partners in the region. This framework will promote inclusive growth for workers and businesses, advance strong labor standards, and tackle climate change. The framework is also central to the Biden Administration's economic strategy in the Indo-Pacific and complements our national security goals in the region.

We will use this framework to address a range of important areas of economic cooperation, including: fair and resilient trade (including labor, digital and other elements); supply chain resilience; infrastructure, decarbonization, and clean energy; and, tax and anti-corruption. USTR will lead efforts to craft a trade arrangement with parties that includes provisions on: high-standard labor commitments; environmental sustainability; cooperation in the digital economy; sustainable food systems and science-based agricultural regulation; transparency and good regulatory practices; competition policy; and, trade facilitation. The

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 11

specific content of the trade arrangement will be developed through extensive consultation with trading partners, a broad base of stakeholders, and Congress.

B. World Trade Organization

The Biden Administration is committed to the WTO. Consistent with our approach to trade policy more broadly, the Biden Administration believes the WTO can––and should––be a force for good that encourages a race to the top and confronts global challenges as they arise. There is strong precedent for this approach: the Marrakesh Declaration and Agreement, on which the WTO is founded, begins with the recognition that the purpose of trade should be to raise living standards and ensure full employment, bearing in mind the objective of sustainable development, and the need to protect and preserve the environment.

Unfortunately, the WTO has fallen short with respect to these ambitions, and its relevance and credibility have accordingly come under fire. In recent years, the WTO's inadequacy in responding to the needs of everyday people and the inability of current rules to effectively constrain unfair trade and economic practices have only become clearer. The pandemic has put a fine point on the WTO's struggle to adapt as an organization and to be relevant in responding to pressing global challenges.

That is why the Biden Administration supports a WTO reform agenda that reflects the priorities of our worker-centered approach – one that protects our planet, improves labor standards, and contributes to shared prosperity. Our WTO reform agenda includes restoring efficacy to the negotiating arm and promoting transparency; improving compliance with and enforcement of Members' WTO commitments; and equipping the Organization to effectively address the unfair practices of non-market economies––such as economic coercion––and global market distortions.

The Biden Administration understands that these reform conversations will take time, and we are working to deliver results on achievable outcomes through the WTO's existing structure. Throughout 2021, WTO Members undertook work to orient Members' efforts towards a pandemic response and greater preparedness, and sought to identify priority steps that could be taken including in the area of trade facilitation and intellectual property protections. While some progress has been made, there is still no multilaterally agreed outcome. The Biden Administration supports a waiver of intellectual property protections for COVID-19 vaccines, but the broader institution has not been able to reach consensus on an agreement to do so. We will continue to press for solutions on this issue in 2022.

Additionally, the postponement of last year's 12th Ministerial Conference (MC12) was a disappointment, but safety and security in the midst of a pandemic appropriately take priority. However, the work can, and must, continue and MC12 is being rescheduled for late Spring 2022. The Biden Administration worked diligently throughout 2021 to secure meaningful outcomes for the planned Ministerial across a range of topics including broad reform of the WTO. We will continue engaging with partners to make progress on these issues in 2022.

C. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

As noted above, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also recognized that trade must work for all, and it is another venue that provides the Administration with an opportunity to advance our worker-centered trade agenda.

In addition, recognizing this opportunity and following our commitment to defend U.S. economic interests, the Biden Administration has focused on the resolution of long-standing U.S. concerns about discriminatory digital services taxes and the negotiation of a historic political agreement to end the race to the bottom in

12 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

global income tax competition. As part of the 2021 historic OECD framework on global taxation, U.S. trading partners around the globe have agreed to roll back existing digital services taxes (DSTs) and other similar measures as the global tax reform is implemented, and not to adopt any new DSTs, which target and discriminate against American companies and their workers. Over the course of 2021, the Biden Administration reached agreements with India, Turkey, Austria, France, Italy, Spain, and the UK suspending the application of DSTs during the interim period prior to full implementation of Pillar 1 of the OECD framework. USTR will continue to monitor the implementation of these agreements by our trading partners and is prepared to examine all options, including under our trade agreements and domestic statutes, if other countries move forward with new DSTs during the implementation period.

D. Bilateral Initiatives

President Biden has used trade policy as a tool to rebuild relationships with trading partners to advance a worker-centered trade policy. Some of these engagements were held under the auspices of existing trade agreements, including free trade agreements (FTAs) and trade and investment framework agreements (TIFAs), while others led to the formation of new partnerships.

1. European Union

The United States and the EU share an economic relationship of critical importance, as well as the goals of growing the middle class, redressing inequality, and incentivizing responsible environmental stewardship. The Biden Administration believes that a strong U.S.–EU partnership is key to advancing a worker-centered trade policy around the globe.

The Biden Administration is focused on using trade policy as a tool to reduce irritants where possible, resolving conflicts in a manner that advances a worker-centered, sustainable trade policy. For example, the U.S. and EU have been engaged since 2004 in a dispute over government subsidies to producers in the large civil aircraft sector. After 17 years of bitter, resource-intensive litigation, the Biden Administration negotiated June 2021 agreements with the EU and UK to suspend tariffs for five years. Removing this longstanding irritant, allows the United States, EU, and UK to continue to focus on promoting global trade based on fair competition.

Additionally, the United States and the EU launched the TTC last year to promote U.S. and EU competitiveness and prosperity and the spread of democratic, market-oriented values by improving transatlantic trade and investment in products and services of emerging technology, strengthening our technological and industrial leadership, boosting innovation, and protecting and promoting critical and emerging technologies and infrastructure. We stand together in continuing to protect our businesses, consumers, and workers from unfair trade practices, in particular those posed by non-market economies that are undermining the world trading system.

In September 2021, the Biden Administration was pleased to host the inaugural TTC ministerial meeting in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where the United States and the EU agreed to collaborate on a number of concrete areas of work in the Global Trade Challenges working group led by USTR. The areas of focus include responding to the challenges posed by non-market economy policies and practices, avoiding unnecessary barriers to trade in emerging technology products and services, promoting and protecting labor rights and decent work, combating child and forced labor, expanding resilient and sustainable global supply chains, and trade and environment.

The TTC is a key component of our cooperative work with the EU to address our common challenges with respect to non-market policies and practices, including combating economic coercion, in line with our

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 13

shared values. Going forward, the Biden Administration will also seek to use the TTC to cooperate on the development and deployment of new technologies that are based on our shared democratic values, including respect for human rights, and that encourage compatible standards and regulations as appropriate, while respecting the sovereign right to regulate.

2. India

The United States and India share a dynamic and important trade and investment relationship. In 2021, the United States and India relaunched the United States–India Trade Policy Forum (TPF), which had not met since 2017. In 2022, USTR will look to the TPF to tackle issues that include the relationship between trade, labor, and the environment. The United States and India will also collaborate on building resilient supply chains and promoting a transparent, rules-based trading system for market economies and democracies.

3. Japan

Japan has long been a valued trading partner of the United States, as well as a close ally. In 2022, we announced with Japan a new Section 232 tariff agreement to allow historically-based sustainable volumes of Japanese steel products to enter the U.S. market without the application of Section 232 tariffs. This deal will help ensure the long-term viability of our steel industry and defend American jobs. It is also part of our efforts to provide relief for American manufacturers who rely on readily accessible, affordable steel to make their products and to lower prices for American families.

Additionally, we announced in 2021 the launch of the U.S.–Japan Partnership on Trade. This initiative reaffirms the shared commitment to strengthen the U.S.–Japan alliance through regular engagement to advance an agenda of cooperation as well as to address bilateral trade issues of concern to either side. The initial areas of focus for cooperation include issues such as third country concerns, cooperation in regional and multilateral trade-related fora, addressing labor and environment-related priorities, a supportive digital ecosystem for all, and trade facilitation, among others.

The first series of meetings under this partnership are scheduled for early 2022, with periodic meetings to be held on a regular basis thereafter to advance our shared agenda. USTR will use this partnership to deepen our cooperation and advance sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and competitive trade policies that lift up our people and economies.

4. Kenya

The United States is committed to continue working with Kenya to deepen our trade and investment relationship, including by advancing worker-centered trade policies and promoting regional and continental economic integration in Africa. The Biden Administration will hold further conversations with the Kenyan Government to establish a shared vision and partnership for economic resilience and to promote investment, equitable and inclusive development, sustainable trade, and African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) implementation. The Biden Administration also views this approach as one to be built upon to include other areas of mutual interest and to serve as a model for engagement with other willing countries on the continent.

5. African Continental Free Trade Area

The United States will continue to engage with the AfCFTA Secretariat and others throughout Africa to support regional economic integration, attract investment in supply chains within the continent, and improve the livelihoods of African workers, including and especially women and youth.

14 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

6. United Kingdom

In 2022, the United States and the United Kingdom will continue to deepen our trade relationship and work to promote trade based on fair competition, address forced labor in supply chains, and address the challenges posed by distortive policies of non-market economies. USTR will hold several events in the United States and the United Kingdom to hear directly from our respective stakeholders on the way forward for U.S.–UK trade ties. We will engage in robust discussions and outline considerations for advancing our trading relationship to support our worker-centered trade policy.

7. Korea

Korea is a valued trading partner and a close ally. The United States–Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS) continues to be both a reflection of that close relationship and the foundation upon which we can build to make it even more cooperative. Following our convening of the KORUS Joint Committee last year, the United States and Korea agreed to hold meetings of the KORUS Labor Affairs Council and Environmental Affairs Council in 2022. Going forward, we are committed to working with Korea to address our shared concerns, such as supply chain challenges, sustainable trade, emerging technologies, the digital economy, and trade facilitation.

8. Taiwan

The United States has a long-standing and vibrant trade relationship with Taiwan, a democratic ally and important trading partner in the region. Last year, the United States and Taiwan convened the 11th TIFA Council, under the auspices of the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) and the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States (TECRO). Going forward, the United States and Taiwan have agreed to work to combat exploitative labor in global supply chains and to form a Labor Working Group under the TIFA. The United States will also work with Taiwan to address outstanding trade concerns, including market access barriers facing U.S. beef and pork producers, and concerns involving copyright legislation, digital piracy, financial services, investment, and regulatory transparency.

9. Singapore

Singapore has long been a critical partner and was the first the first Asian partner to sign a free trade agreement with the United States. In 2021, the two countries convened a United States–Singapore Free Trade Agreement Joint Committee Meeting. Singapore and the United States agreed to press forward with work on the environment, labor, digital trade, supply chains, and intellectual property, among other issues. The United States will continue working closely with Singapore on these matters in 2022.

V. PROMOTING CONFIDENCE IN TRADE POLICY THROUGH ENFORCEMENT

The Biden Administration is committed to vigorously enforcing our trade agreements as a critical element of pushing a global race to the top. Enforcement is a key component of our worker-centered trade policy agenda. We are using all of the tools at our disposal to combat unfair economic practices, defend American jobs, and create broad-based economic prosperity. American workers and businesses can compete with anyone when the playing field is level and competition is fair, and trade policy is an indispensable tool in achieving those goals. We are shaping a global trading system that enforces labor and environmental standards, protects intellectual property rights, and ensures that regulations are science-based and

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 15

predictable.

As discussed above, the Biden Administration has already taken unprecedented action to utilize trade policy as a tool to defend U.S. economic interests. Under the USCMA, we have twice employed the RRM to protect workers' rights, in addition to establishing––and ultimately prevailing in––the first dispute settlement panel under the USMCA. The United States has also repeatedly engaged with Canada and Mexico on a number of issues, including to ensure that U.S. agricultural products receive fair treatment, that the regulatory environment is fair and transparent, and that U.S. goods receive fair treatment.

Continuing to vigorously enforce the USMCA's standards will continue to be a top priority for the Biden Administration in 2022. We are currently engaged in consultations with Mexico under the USMCA's Environment Chapter regarding whether Mexico is meeting its obligations to effectively enforce fisheries-related measures, and we will continue to using all available enforcement mechanisms to robustly uphold all of the Agreement's groundbreaking standards.

We are also thoroughly deploying domestic enforcement tools to protect our economic interests. Last year, the independent U.S. International Trade Commission found that SK Innovation misappropriated the trade secrets of LG Chem with respect to lithium ion batteries for electric vehicles. During the Presidential review period, SK and LG reached a settlement. This proceeding, and the ensuing settlement, provide an important example of a circumstance in which enforcing intellectual property rights also supports U.S. jobs and fair competition.

Similarly, USTR's 2021 Notorious Markets List, released on February 17, is worker-centered in its focus. The Notorious Markets List identifies examples of online and physical markets that reportedly engage in or facilitate substantial copyright piracy or trademark counterfeiting. Consistent with the Administration's worker-centered trade policy, the 2021 Notorious Markets List examines widespread labor abuses and the adverse impact of counterfeiting on workers involved with the manufacture of counterfeit goods.

In addition, the Administration will continue to administer its preference programs in line with our worker-centered agenda and in accordance to the statutory, eligibility criteria. After using all diplomatic means available to induce the governments to remediate the issues, President Biden announced in November 2021 the termination of Ethiopia's, Guinea's, and Mali's eligibility for the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) trade preference program. The United States remains committed to and continues to work with all three countries to meet the clear statutory benchmarks toward reinstatement in the AGOA program.

The United States also opposes acts, policies and practices by foreign countries that are intended to undervalue their currencies in order to gain an unfair competitive advantage over American businesses and workers. Under the Biden Administration, the U.S. government has deployed the full range of available tools to put effective pressure on countries that have been judged to intervene excessively in the foreign exchange market. The Biden Administration is committed to examining the currency practices of all major U.S. trading partners and holding them to account as necessary.

In 2021, following USTR's determination that Vietnam's currency acts, policies, and practices––including excessive and one-sided intervention in the foreign exchange markets––were unreasonable and constituted a burden on U.S. commerce, as well as the Treasury Department's determination that Vietnam met the criteria for "enhanced engagement" under the 2015 Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act, the United States entered into an intensive dialogue with the State Bank of Vietnam. In July 2021, based on an agreement reached between the Department of the Treasury and the State Bank of Vietnam regarding Vietnam's currency practices, USTR determined that no action under Section 301 in the currency investigation was warranted at that time because Vietnam's agreement with Treasury provided a satisfactory resolution of the matter subject to the investigation. USTR, in coordination with Treasury, will

16 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

monitor Vietnam's implementation of its commitments under the agreement and associated measures going forward.

The Biden Administration will continue to monitor the practices of our trading partners and hold them accountable for meeting the standards established under our trade agreements. But President Biden understands that it is not enough to simply enforce the rules of our existing agreements. To achieve meaningful results that level the playing field for U.S. workers, we must be able to combat anticompetitive behavior in other contexts too.

Our current trade tools were crafted decades ago and in some respects are not adequate to address the challenges we are confronting in the modern economy. That's why the Biden Administration supports reviewing our existing trade tools, identifying ways to strengthen them, and creating new tools as necessary. In 2022, we will work with Congress to fully evaluate the efficacy of our current trade tools and identify areas where new tools may be needed.

VI. PROMOTING EQUITABLE, INCLUSIVE, AND DURABLE TRADE POLICY AND EXPANDING STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

Trade policy can play a critical role in advancing equitable and resilient economic growth for underserved and marginalized communities, here in the United States and with trading partners who share concerns about rising inequality. The Biden Administration is committed to thorough and thoughtful engagement as we develop and implement the President's trade policy agenda. Inclusive engagement is a key component to ensuring that our resulting trade policies are durable and equitable, and account for previous common policy shortfalls of failing to engage with communities that will be affected by those decisions. As such, the Biden Administration will continue to give all stakeholders a seat at the table as we evaluate and make these decisions.

A. Promoting Equitable, Inclusive, and Durable Trade Policy

In strengthening the nation's competitiveness and expanding the benefits of trade, racial and gender equity must be core elements of U.S. trade and investment policy. An intersectional, interconnected framework is particularly important in emerging sectors where the United States has the potential to be competitive and create well-paying U.S.-based jobs through trade. For these reasons, many of President Biden's first actions directed the whole of government to embed equity in their policy goals, objectives, and outcomes.

As a result, the 2021 Annual Trade Report includes unprecedented inaugural updates on USTR initiatives to advance racial and gender equity in U.S. trade policy. In addition, all U.S. trade policy tools, engagements, and initiatives will consider and reflect the core principles outlined in the Executive Orders on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government and Worker Organizing and Empowerment, the United States' historic, first National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality, and the Presidential Memoranda on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening the Nation-to-Nation Relationship and on Advancing the Human Rights of LGBTQI+ Persons around the World. In addition, USTR will continue to play a constructive, active role as the co-chair of the White House Initiative on Asian American Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders (WHIAANHPI), and as a member of the Gender Policy Council and White House Council on Native American Affairs (WHCNAA).

Data continues to be critical to informing work with like-minded partners to advance inclusive growth and trade policy. Last year, USTR requested that the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) conduct an

THE PRESIDENT'S 2022 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 17

independent, two-part investigation of the distributional effects of goods and services trade and trade policy on U.S. workers by skill, wage and salary level, gender, race/ethnicity, age, and income level, especially as they affect underrepresented and underserved communities. USTR will review and use the ITC's comprehensive public report expected in 2022 to advance inclusive growth, economic resilience and competitiveness, and data needs. In addition, USTR's future requests for probable economic effects advice will include estimates of the potential distributional effects of trade and trade policy, including goods and services imports and exports, on U.S. workers.

B. Engagement and Consultation with Partners and Stakeholders

The Biden Administration recognizes Congress' important role in crafting U.S. trade and investment policy. We welcome and seek guidance and feedback from Members of Congress to share their views and constituents' priorities regarding trade policy. USTR leadership and staff have visited Members and their constituents in different regions of the country to listen to and learn about their trade experiences firsthand. In 2022, the Biden Administration will continue to actively engage with Congress and work with Members to address their trade policy priorities.

Additionally, the Biden Administration is committed to engaging with a wide range of diverse and underserved communities as we develop and implement our trade policy agenda. USTR will continue connecting with stakeholders with diverse perspectives and experiences throughout the country to listen, learn, and build trusted relationships and lines of communication to develop inclusive policy that delivers equitable results.

The Biden Administration has also regularly consulted and briefed the 28 advisory committees that USTR manages and co-leads as we seek to hear input from labor unions, environmental groups, consumer groups, nongovernmental organizations, State and local Governments, industry, and academia. In addition to seeking cleared advisor feedback on how to improve the administration of advisory committees, USTR will continue to invite and challenge cleared advisors to consider and advise on advancing innovative, equitable trade and investment policy, and encourage diverse and inclusive perspectives to apply to serve on trade advisory committees.