INTRODUCTION

President Biden is focused on ending the COVID-19 pandemic and strengthening the economy by taking bold steps to increase vaccine production and delivery, re-open our schools, and make landmark investments in our economy to put people back to work and deliver immediate relief to American families. The President's Build Back Better agenda will create millions of good-paying jobs and support America's working families by tackling four national challenges: building a stronger industrial and innovation base so the future is made in America; building sustainable infrastructure and a clean energy future; building a stronger, caring economy; and, advancing racial equity across the board.

The President's trade agenda is an essential component of the fight against COVID-19, the economic recovery, and the Build Back Better agenda. President Biden seeks a fair international trading system that promotes inclusive economic growth and reflects America's universal values. The President knows that trade policy should respect the dignity of work and value Americans as workers and wage-earners, not only as consumers. The President's trade agenda will restore U.S. global leadership on critical matters like combatting forced labor and exploitative labor conditions, corruption, and discrimination against women and minorities around the world. Through bilateral and multilateral engagement, the Biden Administration will seek to build consensus on how trade policies may address the climate crisis, bolster sustainable renewable energy supply chains, end unfair trade practices, discourage regulatory arbitrage, and foster innovation and creativity.

Central components of the 2021 trade agenda will be the development and reinforcement of resilient manufacturing supply chains, especially those made up of small businesses, to ensure that the United States is better prepared to confront future public health crises. Additionally, trade policies will thoughtfully address the opportunities and challenges posed by the digital economy and prepare for any potential future disruptions to the global trading system.

Opening markets and reducing trade barriers are fundamental to any trade agenda. This will be a priority for the Biden Administration, particularly since export-oriented producers, manufacturers, and businesses enjoy greater than average productivity and wages. Market opportunities reap the greatest economic benefits when they are pursued in alignment with the interests of American workers and innovators, manufacturers, farmers, ranchers, fishers, and underserved communities. Under the Biden Administration, trade policy will encourage domestic investment and innovation and increase economic security for American families, including through combatting unfair practices by our trading partners.

President Biden's comprehensive trade agenda will contribute to a strong domestic recovery and ensure future opportunities for American workers and businesses, including through opening international markets. The prioritized trade policies below support the President's work to end the pandemic and strengthen the economy, while looking toward a more sustainable future by tackling unfair trade practices, creating and retaining good-paying American jobs, implementing labor practices that protect workers, and promoting policies that protect our environment.

2 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2021 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

PRESIDENT BIDEN'S POLICY PRIORITIES

Tackling the COVID-19 Pandemic and Restoring the Economy

The COVID-19 pandemic continues to be the greatest threat to the U.S. economy. President Biden is pursuing domestic policies that will help to stop the spread of the virus, safely re-open the economy, and invest in a nationwide recovery. The Biden Administration is focused on increasing vaccine production and distribution so that every American can be vaccinated as soon as possible. In addition, the Biden Administration is committed to making the necessary long-term investments to strengthen domestic production of essential medical equipment that will expand industrial capacity and bolster preparation to tackle future public health crises. The trade agenda will support these domestic investments with the goal of ensuring that frontline workers have immediate access to necessary personal protective equipment and promoting long-term supply chain resiliency for equipment and supplies critical to protecting public health in the United States. Trade policy will also support the broader economic recovery by helping companies, including small businesses and entrepreneurs, put Americans to work by building world-class products for export to foreign markets.

The Biden Administration is also committed to advancing global health security to save lives, promote economic recovery, and develop resilience against future global pandemics or crises. It looks forward to working with trading partners to collaborate on initiatives to address the global health and humanitarian response.

Putting Workers at the Center of Trade Policy

The Biden Administration recognizes that trade policy is an essential part of the Build Back Better agenda, and the trade agenda must protect and empower workers, drive wage-driven growth, and lead to better economic outcomes for all Americans. A worker-centered trade policy requires extensive engagement with unions and other worker advocates. Under the Biden Administration, workers will have a seat at the table in the development of trade policies.

The Biden Administration will review past trade policies for their impacts on, and unintended consequences for, workers. Labor obligations under existing agreements will be fully enforced. The Biden Administration is committed to self-initiating and advancing petitions under the new Rapid Response Mechanism in the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) to ensure workers receive relief through efficient, facility-level enforcement when there are violations of the USMCA.

New trade policies will be crafted to promote equitable economic growth through the inclusion in trade agreements of strong, enforceable labor standards that protect workers' rights and increase economic security. Trading partners will not be allowed to gain a competitive advantage by violating workers' rights and pursuing unfair trade practices. In addition, the Biden Administration will engage with allies to achieve commitments to fight forced labor and exploitative labor conditions, and increase transparency and accountability in global supply chains. President Biden opposes attempts by foreign countries to artificially manipulate currency values to gain unfair advantage over American workers. The Biden Administration will examine how Treasury, Commerce and USTR can work together to put effective pressure on countries that are intervening in the foreign exchange market to gain a trade advantage. The Biden Administration is prepared to use the full range of trade tools at its disposal to ensure that products that use forced labor and exploitative labor conditions are not imported into the United States, and fight back against other unfair labor practices.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2021 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 3

Putting the World on a Sustainable Environment and Climate Path

The United States and the global community face a profound climate crisis, and the Biden Administration is committed to pursuing action at home and abroad to avoid the increasingly disruptive and potentially catastrophic impact of climate change. The United States will work with other countries, both bilaterally and multilaterally, toward environmental sustainability.

As part of this whole-of-government effort, the trade agenda will include the negotiation and implementation of strong environmental standards that are also critical to a sustainable climate pathway. These standards will include promoting sustainable stewardship of natural resources, such as sustainable fisheries management, and preventing harmful environmental practices, such as illegal logging and wildlife trafficking. This comprehensive approach may also entail leveraging our strong bilateral and multilateral trade relationships to raise global climate ambition.

The Biden Administration will work with allies and partners that are committed to fighting climate change. This will include exploring and developing market and regulatory approaches to address greenhouse gas emissions in the global trading system. As appropriate, and consistent with domestic approaches to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, this includes consideration of carbon border adjustments. Additionally, the Biden Administration will work with allies as they develop their own approaches and act against trading partners that fail to meet their environmental obligations under existing trade agreements.

The trade agenda will support the Biden Administration's comprehensive vision of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and achieving net-zero global emissions by 2050, or before, by fostering U.S. innovation and production of climate-related technology and promoting resilient renewable energy supply chains.

Advancing Racial Equity and Supporting Underserved Communities

The Biden Administration is committed to advancing racial equity and supporting underserved communities as part of the mission of all federal government agencies and offices. The trade agenda will support domestic initiatives that eliminate social and economic structural barriers to equality and economic opportunity and pursue the same objectives in negotiations with our trading partners.

In the past year, the COVID-19 pandemic exposed the devastating effect of persistent economic disparities on communities of color. The Biden Administration is committed to a trade agenda that acknowledges this grave reality and ensures that the concerns and perspectives of Black, Latino, Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI), and Native American workers, their families, and businesses are a cornerstone of proposed policies.

Through thoughtful, sustained engagement, and innovative data collection and sharing, the Biden Administration will seek to better understand the projected impact of proposed trade policies on communities of color and to ensure those impacts are considered before pursuing such policies. The trade agenda will be shaped by meaningful outreach to and engagement with community-based stakeholders, such as minority-owned businesses, business incubators, Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), other minority serving institutions (MSIs), and local and national civil rights organizations.

4 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2021 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

Addressing China's Coercive and Unfair Economic Trade Practices Through a Comprehensive Strategy

The Biden Administration recognizes that China's coercive and unfair trade practices harm American workers, threaten our technological edge, weaken our supply chain resiliency, and undermine our national interests. Addressing the China challenge will require a comprehensive strategy and more systematic approach than the piecemeal approach of the recent past. The Biden Administration is conducting a comprehensive review of U.S. trade policy toward China as part of its development of its overall China strategy.

The Biden Administration is committed to using all available tools to take on the range of China's unfair trade practices that continue to harm U.S. workers and businesses. These detrimental actions include China's tariffs and non-tariff barriers to restrict market access, government-sanctioned forced labor programs, overcapacity in numerous sectors, industrial policies utilizing unfair subsidies and favoring import substitution, and export subsidies (including through export financing). They also include coercive technology transfers, illicit acquisition and infringement of American intellectual property, censorship and other restrictions on the internet and digital economy, and a failure to provide treatment to American firms in numerous sectors comparable to the treatment Chinese firms receive in those sectors in the United States.

The Biden Administration will also make it a top priority to address the widespread human rights abuses of the Chinese Government's forced labor program that targets the Uyghurs and other ethnic and religious minorities in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region and elsewhere in the country. Americans and consumers around the world do not want products made with forced labor on store shelves, and workers should not be disadvantaged by competing with a state sponsored regime of systematic repression. The trade agenda will consider all options to combat forced labor and enhance corporate accountability in the global market.

The Biden Administration will pursue strengthened enforcement to ensure that China lives up to its existing trade obligations. Where gaps exist in international trade rules, the United States will work to address them, including through enhanced cooperation with our partners and allies. At the same time, the Biden Administration will make transformative investments at home in American workers, infrastructure, education, and innovation necessary to enhance U.S. competitiveness and put the United States in a stronger position to address the challenges arising out of Chinese economic policies.

Partnering with Friends and Allies

The Biden Administration will seek to repair partnerships and alliances and restore U.S. leadership around the world. The Biden Administration will reengage and be a leader in international organizations, including the World Trade Organization (WTO). The United States will work with Director-General Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and like-minded trading partners to implement necessary reforms to the WTO's substantive rules and procedures to address the challenges facing the global trading system, including growing inequality, digital transformation, and impediments to small business trade. The Biden Administration will also work with allies and like-minded trading partners to establish high-standard global rules to govern the digital economy, in line with our shared democratic values.

The Biden Administration will also coordinate with friends and allies to pressure the Chinese Government to end its unfair trade practices and to hold China accountable, including for the extensive human rights abuses perpetrated by its state-sanctioned forced labor program. In addition, the trade agenda will seek to collaborate with friends and allies to address global market distortions created by industrial overcapacity in

THE PRESIDENT'S 2021 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 5

sectors ranging from steel and aluminum to fiber optics, solar, and other sectors to which the Chinese Government has been a key contributor.

Standing Up for American Farmers, Ranchers, Food Manufacturers, and Fishers

U.S. farmers, ranchers, food manufacturers, and fishers compete in global markets, and expanded market access raises incomes, expands employment, and lets their farms, ranches, manufacturing plants, and fishing operations thrive. America's agricultural communities have been burdened in recent years by erratic trade actions that were taken without a broader strategy. These actions triggered retaliation by our trading partners, leading to billions of dollars in lost exports and precipitating unprecedented mitigation payments. The Biden Administration is committed to standing up for American farmers, ranchers, food manufacturers, and fishers by pursuing smarter trade policies that are inclusive and work for all producers. The trade agenda will seek to expand global market opportunities for American farmers, ranchers, food manufacturers, and fishers and will defend our producers by enforcing global agricultural trade rules.

Promoting Equitable Economic Growth Around the World

The Biden Administration is committed to leveraging the global leadership of the United States to promote economic stability and alleviate poverty in developing countries. The trade agenda plays an important role in creating economic opportunities abroad, but the Biden Administration knows that simply granting greater market access for corporations will not alone result in equitable economic growth or worker empowerment in our trading partners. Policies that promote equitable global economic growth and increase global demand benefit American workers, manufacturers, farmers, ranchers, fishers and service providers by expanding the customer base, and increasing global demand helps support better prices.

The trade agenda will include a review of existing trade programs to evaluate their contribution to equitable economic development, including whether they reduce wage gaps, increase worker unionization, promote safe workplaces, tackle forced labor and exploitative labor conditions, and lead to the economic empowerment of women and underrepresented communities. As part of this review, the Biden Administration will seek to incorporate corporate accountability and sustainability into trade policies. In addition, the Biden Administration is committed to engaging in robust technical assistance and trade capacity building with trading partners to ensure workers and small and medium-sized enterprises around the world benefit from U.S. trade policy.

Making the Rules Count

The Biden Administration will act when our trading partners break the trade rules. Strong trade enforcement is essential to making sure our trading partners live up to their commitments and that U.S. trade policy benefits American workers, manufacturers, farmers, businesses, families, and communities. President Biden will not hesitate to bring trade cases against trading partners that discriminate against American businesses or deny our producers market access. The trade agenda will include comprehensive enforcement of labor and environmental standards of existing trade agreements and will consider new ways of addressing the suppression of wages and workers' rights in other countries to the detriment of U.S. workers. Although unilateral action may be necessary in some instances, President Biden will make it a priority to work with friends and allies on trade enforcement and pursue meaningful change for U.S. workers and businesses in the global trading landscape.

6 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2021 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

CONCLUSION

The Biden Administration will pursue a trade policy that helps the U.S. economy recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and reinforces investments our country is making in the domestic economy. In addition, the President's trade agenda will be a critical component of the Biden Administration's plan to Build Back Better. Through a review of existing policies, negotiations of new standards, enforcement of our trade agreements, and partnership with our friends and allies, President Biden's trade agenda will support all workers, combat climate change, advance racial equity, increase supply chain resiliency, and expand market opportunities for American manufacturers, producers, farmers, fishers, and businesses of all sizes. The Biden Administration will prioritize trade policies that have tangible benefits for all working Americans, families, and communities.