INTRODUCTION

President Trump promised to make fundamental changes to U.S. trade policy in order to achieve results that benefit all Americans, and the President has kept that promise. Actions taken to implement the President's trade policy led to a historic year for American trade. Over the last year:

• The President confronted China's unfair trade policies and practices head-on and imposed substantial tariffs, resulting in a groundbreaking Phase One trade agreement with China. This agreement obligates China to take actions to cease its unfair trade policies and practices that harm U.S. business, workers, farmers, and ranchers. At the same time, China has committed to significantly increase its purchase of goods and services from the United States. The United States continues to maintain tariffs on approximately $370 billion in goods from China and has express authority under the agreement to take additional action to enforce China's compliance.

• The President signed into law the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA), an agreement that rebalances the U.S. trade relationship with Mexico and Canada, implements groundbreaking provisions for electronic commerce, establishes robust protections for labor and environment, and incentivizes manufacturing in the United States.

• The United States entered into two separate agreements with Japan, the world's third-largest economy, that will create massive export opportunities for American farmers and boost the approximately $40 billion in digital trade currently between the two countries.

• The United States won the largest award in World Trade Organization (WTO) history, obtaining the right to impose countermeasures on $7.5 billion of goods from the European Union (EU) in response to the harm to U.S. interests caused by EU Member States' subsidies to Airbus.

• The United States initiated action against France for its unfair and discriminatory "digital services tax" that targeted American technology companies, resulting in an agreement to suspend collection of the tax.

• The United States brought about a fundamental rethinking of the World Trade Organization, an institution that has strayed far from its original mission and purpose.

Implementation of the President's trade agenda has benefitted all Americans. The economy is strong, unemployment is at an all-time low, increasing numbers of Americans who left the job market are now working again, and wage growth has accelerated.

Perhaps most significantly, however, the President's trade agenda has helped those Americans most harmed by the failed policies of the last 25 years. In the decades following the North American Free Trade Agreement's (NAFTA) implementation and China's accession to the WTO, America lost 1 in 4 manufacturing jobs, more than 60,000 American factories were shut down, and millions of high-paying U.S. jobs were shipped overseas. President Trump committed to ending disastrous trade deals of the past, and he delivered.

2 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

Since President Trump's election, the working class has seen tremendous growth. The United States is experiencing a blue-collar boom, driven by trade policy and other economic initiatives of the Administration:

• Under the Trump Administration, net worth for the bottom 50 percent of households has increased at an annual rate 15 times higher than the average growth seen under the three prior administrations' expansion periods.

• At more than $66,000, real median household income is now at the highest level ever recorded.

• Wealth inequality has finally declined, as the share of net worth held by the bottom 50 percent of households has increased while the share held by the top one percent of households has decreased.

• While 15,000 manufacturing jobs were lost in the 12 months prior to President Trump's election, more than 500,000 manufacturing jobs have been added to the American economy since then.

• Wages are growing faster for nearly all groups, but historically disadvantaged groups are seeing the fastest growth. Since President Trump took office:
o Average wage growth for Americans without a bachelor's degree has outpaced wage growth for those with a bachelor's degree or higher.
o Average wage growth for individuals at the 10th percentile of the income distribution has outpaced wage growth for individuals at the 90th percentile.
o Average wage growth for African Americans and Hispanics has outpaced overall average wage growth.

These results are the opposite of those observed over the previous administration's expansion period, where historically advantaged groups saw higher wage gains. When measured as the share of income earned by the top 20 percent, income inequality fell in 2018 by the largest amount in over a decade.

These facts confirm the United States' unprecedented blue-collar boom. Increased wealth for the bottom half of American households, faster wage growth for historically disadvantaged Americans, and falling welfare enrollment as incomes rise and people come off the labor market's sidelines—these are the results of President Trump's pro-growth, pro-worker trade policies.

Going forward, President Trump will continue to rebalance America's relationship with its trading partners, aggressively enforce our trade laws, and take prompt action in response to unfair trade practices by other nations. The Administration's goals for the next year include:

• Robust enforcement of commitments by our trading partners in trade agreements, including the USMCA, the China Phase One Agreement, and WTO agreements.

• New trade agreements with important partners, including the United Kingdom and the European Union, as well as Kenya, which would be the United States' first free trade agreement in sub-Saharan Africa.

• Conduct further negotiations with Japan for a comprehensive trade agreement that results in a more fair and reciprocal trade and economic relationship.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 3

• Pursue a Phase Two Agreement with China that continues to require structural reforms and other changes to China's economic and trade regime.

• Limiting the WTO to its original purpose of serving as a forum for nations to negotiate trade agreements, monitor compliance with agreements, and facilitate the resolution of international trade disputes.

4 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

PROMISES MADE AND PROMISES KEPT:
THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE AGENDA

When President Trump assumed Office in January 2017, he declared that changing the direction of U.S. trade policy was a key priority. President Trump identified the following goals: (i) replace NAFTA with a balanced and modern trade agreement with Mexico and Canada; (ii) combat China's unfair trade policies and practices, which have harmed the United States for years, and move toward a more balanced trade relationship; (iii) vigorously enforce U.S. trade laws and provisions in existing U.S. trade agreements; (iv) enter into new, beneficial trade agreements with our largest trade partners; and (v) address the systemic problems at the World Trade Organization that have undermined the effectiveness of trade agreements and trade laws. The President has delivered results on all of these goals and will continue in 2020 to pursue results in international trade that benefit all Americans.

A. The President Kept His Promises and Achieved Historic Successes

By placing trade at the center of his agenda, the President achieved more trade successes over the last year than prior administrations achieved in a typical decade. Most significantly, President Trump confronted China and its unfair trade practices, after years of little more than talk, and achieved an enforceable agreement. The Phase One Agreement requires China to take significant concrete steps to cease its unfair practices and rebalance the trade relationship by committing to substantial purchases of U.S. goods and services. The replacement of NAFTA with the USMCA, an agreement that provides incentives for U.S. manufacturing and makes crucial changes to reflect the modern economy, was also a signal achievement of the President. Finally, the Administration took action on numerous trade issues––large and small––to further the President's agenda of a trade policy that benefits all Americans.

1. The President Entered Into a Historic Phase One Agreement with China that Combats Unfair Trade Policies and Practices and Rebalances the U.S.-China Trade Relationship

When President Trump assumed office, the United States had suffered from China's unfair trade policies and practices for decades. These unfair policies and practices harmed U.S. economic interests and undermined American manufacturing, services, and innovation. The Administration took specific action to combat certain of China's unfair practices by initiating an investigation of China under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.

The investigation of China's Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation found four categories of acts, policies, and practices of China that unfairly result in the transfer of technologies and intellectual property (IP) from U.S. companies to China. These policies harm U.S. businesses and workers and threaten the long-term competitiveness of the United States.

Based on President Trump's direction, USTR took a series of actions in response to China's harmful acts, policies, and practices, including imposing additional duties on certain products from China and pursuing dispute settlement at the World Trade Organization (WTO). In 2018, the United States imposed additional 25 percent tariffs on approximately $50 billion of goods imported from China and 10 percent tariffs on an additional $200 billion. Throughout 2018 and early 2019, the United States and China met on numerous occasions in efforts to resolve U.S. complaints about China's longstanding unfair practices. Those efforts suffered a blow in May 2019 when, as the two parties appeared on the cusp of an agreement, the Chinese government reneged on negotiated outcomes and hardened its positions. In response, the United States

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 5

increased the tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese imports to 25 percent from 10 percent and added 15 percent tariffs on an additional approximately $120 billion of Chinese imports.

In order to mitigate harm to U.S. workers and businesses that could result from certain tariffs, USTR implemented a comprehensive exclusions process, whereby businesses could seek to exclude certain products from tariff increases. USTR bases exclusion determinations on an assessment of the extent to which the product implicated China's "Made in China 2025" program, was not readily available in the United States or outside of China, or the potential that the tariff would cause severe economic harm to U.S. workers, businesses, or other interests. In 2019, USTR processed more than 25,000 exclusion requests, granting more than 5,000 exclusions covering billions of dollars of imports.

In the late Summer and Fall of 2019, China re-engaged with the United States, and the parties commenced intensive discussions aimed at resolving numerous long-standing U.S. concerns. On December 13, 2019, the Administration announced the conclusion of the U.S.–China Economic and Trade Agreement (Phase One Agreement). President Trump and Vice Premier Liu He signed the Phase One Agreement on January 15, 2020.

The Phase One Agreement with China requires major structural changes to China's behavior with respect to intellectual property protection, technology transfer, agricultural standards, financial services, and currency. Specifically:

• The Phase One Agreement includes enforceable obligations on trade secrets, patents, trademarks, geographical indications, pharmaceutical-related intellectual property, and enforcement against pirated and counterfeit goods.

• The Phase One Agreement prohibits China from forcing or pressuring U.S. companies to turn over their technology as a condition for market access, to gain administrative or licensing approvals, or to receive advantages from the Chinese government. Any transfer of technology must be voluntary and take place on market terms. In addition, China has committed not to direct or support outbound investments aimed at acquiring foreign technology to meet its market-distorting industrial plans.

• The agriculture chapter of the Agreement addresses a number of structural barriers to U.S. exports. China must implement a fair, predictable, science-based and risk-based regulatory process that will facilitate exports of U.S. meat, poultry, seafood, rice, dairy, infant formula, horticultural products, animal feed, pet food, and more. Importantly, this includes requirements to approve certain U.S. biotech traits more promptly.

• The Phase One Agreement also removes a wide range of discriminatory regulatory requirements and limitations that have stifled U.S. companies seeking to operate in China's financial services market. This change will allow U.S. banks, insurance companies, credit rating services, electronic payment services and other financial services to compete on a more level playing field.

• The agreement tackles China's unfair currency practices, with enforceable commitments against currency devaluations and the targeting of exchange rates.

In addition to requiring China to make structural changes, the Phase One Agreement expands trade, with enforceable commitments by China to increase purchases of U.S. exports by no less than $200 billion over the next two years in four major areas: manufactured goods, agriculture, energy, and services. Both sides

6 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

expect that China's increased imports of U.S. goods and services will continue on this trajectory beyond 2021.

The United States agreed to reduce the increased tariff rate on the $120 billion in Chinese goods from 15 percent to 7.5 percent, but it maintained the additional tariffs on an additional $250 billion in Chinese goods at 25 percent.

Crucially, the Phase One Agreement establishes a strong dispute resolution system that ensures prompt and effective implementation and enforcement of the commitments in the agreement. The United States is establishing a Bilateral Evaluation and Dispute Resolution Office to assess implementation and attempt to resolve disputes. If a dispute is not resolved, the complaining party has the right to take action, including by suspending an obligation under the Agreement or adopting a trade measure in a proportionate way.

Finally, the United States and China committed to pursuing a Phase Two Agreement that would address other important aspects of the trade relationship, including China's subsidization of its industries and cyber-theft.

2. The President Kept His Promise to Replace NAFTA with a Modern and Balanced Trade Agreement between the United States and Canada and Mexico

On January 29, 2020, President Trump signed into law the historic United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA). The enactment of the USMCA is the fulfillment of President Trump's promise to replace the outdated North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with a 21st century agreement that will lead to fairer trade and robust economic growth in North America. Negotiated over the course of two years, the USMCA exemplifies the President's vision for an America First trade policy. The USMCA will create more manufacturing jobs, defend America's competitive advantage in technology and innovation, protect workers and the environment, and secure greater market access for America's businesses, farmers and ranchers.

The USMCA resulted from more than two years of hard work by the Administration, first in negotiations with Canada and Mexico, and then in lengthy consultations and negotiations with the United States Congress. The resulting agreement is a model for future United States trade agreements.

Among the key provisions of the USMCA are the following:

• Increasing Regional Value Content: The USMCA encourages U.S. manufacturing and regional economic growth by requiring that 75 percent of auto content be made in North America. This is a substantial increase from the 62.5 percent of regional value content required under NAFTA.

• Creating New Labor Value Content: The USMCA uses trade rules to incentivize production in the United States by requiring that 40 percent to 45 percent of auto content be made by workers earning at least $16 per hour.

• Strongest Labor Provisions of Any Trade Agreement: The USMCA brings labor obligations into the core of the agreement and makes them fully enforceable. Mexico has agreed to overhaul its system of labor justice so that workers have the right to secret ballot votes to elect union leadership, challenge union leadership, and approve new and existing collective bargaining agreements. USMCA also includes an innovative "Rapid Response" dispute settlement mechanism to ensure compliance with the Labor Chapter's obligations, including Mexico's labor reform commitments.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 7

• Expanded Market Access for American Food and Agricultural Products: Under USMCA, America's dairy farmers will have new export opportunities to sell dairy products into Canada, and Canada will provide new access for United States chicken and eggs and increase U.S. access for turkey. Under a modernized agreement, all other tariffs on agricultural products traded between the United States and Mexico will remain at zero.

• Effectively Supporting Trade in Manufactured Goods: The USMCA's Market Access chapter will more effectively support trade in manufactured goods by removing provisions in NAFTA that are no longer relevant, updating key references, and affirming commitments that have been phased in from NAFTA.

• Strengthening Supply Chains to Provide New Market Opportunities for the Textile and Apparel Sector: USMCA's new provisions on textiles incentivize greater North American production in textiles and apparel trade, strengthen customs enforcement, and facilitate broader consultation and cooperation among the Parties on issues related to textiles and apparel trade.

• Protections for U.S. Innovators and Creators: The USMCA chapter on Intellectual Property provides strong, effective protection and enforcement of IP rights that are critical to driving innovation, creating economic growth, and supporting American jobs.

• Digital Trade: The USMCA contains the strongest disciplines on digital trade of any international agreement. The Digital Trade chapter includes prohibiting data localization measures that restrict where data can be stored and processed, and extends these rules to financial service suppliers in circumstances where a financial regulator has the access to data needed to fulfill its regulatory and supervisory mandate. These disciplines provide a firm foundation for the expansion of trade and investment in the innovative products and services where the United States already has a competitive advantage.

• Preventing Discrimination Against U.S. Financial Services: The USMCA contains strong commitments to facilitate a level playing field for U.S. service suppliers, and further liberalizes financial services markets through a strong Financial Services chapter.

• Currency Transparency Commitments: The USMCA addresses unfair currency practices by requiring high-standard commitments to refrain from competitive devaluations and targeting exchange rates, while significantly increasing transparency and providing mechanisms for accountability.

• Strongest, Most Enforceable Environmental Obligations of Any Trade Agreement: Like the Labor chapter, the Environment chapter of the USMCA brings all environmental provisions into the core of the agreement and makes them enforceable. The USMCA includes commitments to implement key multilateral environmental agreements to which the United States is a party, such as the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances. The USMCA also addresses key environmental challenges such as illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing and harmful fisheries subsidies. USMCA commits the United States, Canada and Mexico to take actions to combat and cooperate to prevent trafficking in timber and fish and other wildlife. For the first time in a U.S. trade agreement, the USMCA also addresses other pressing environmental issues such as air quality and marine litter.

8 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

These trade victories, and many others, in the USMCA are the result of President Trump's determination to end NAFTA and create a North American trade agreement that helps American workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses. It is also the result of extensive consultations among the Office of the United States Trade Representative, Members of Congress, and stakeholders in fulfillment of Trade Promotion Authority requirements. Since the United States launched negotiations with Mexico and Canada in August 2017, USTR invested an astounding 3,108 work-hours in consultations with Congress. The contributions made by both Republicans and Democrats made the USMCA a truly bipartisan success.

3. The United States Entered into Two Important Agreements with Japan

The United States and Japan are the world's first and third largest national economies, respectively, and represent about 30 percent of global gross domestic product. In 2019, the United States and Japan signed two trade agreements that represent early achievements from negotiations in the areas of market access and digital trade.

a. The United States–Japan Trade Agreement

The United States–Japan Trade Agreement liberalizes market access between the two countries. The Agreement eliminates or reduces tariffs for over $7 billion in U.S. food and agricultural exports. When fully implemented, more than 90 percent of U.S. food and agricultural products imported into Japan will either be duty free or receive preferential tariff access. For example, under the agreement, Japan will:

• Reduce tariffs on products such as fresh and frozen beef and pork.
• Provide a country-specific quota for wheat and wheat products.
• Reduce the mark-up on imported U.S. wheat and barley.
• Immediately eliminate tariffs for almonds, walnuts, blueberries, cranberries, sweet corn, grain sorghum, broccoli, and more.
• Provide staged tariff elimination for products such as cheeses, processed pork, poultry, ethanol, wine, frozen potatoes, oranges, fresh cherries, egg products, and tomato paste.

For the many products covered under the agreement, it gives American farmers and ranchers the same advantage as CP-TPP countries selling into the Japanese market.

The United States will provide tariff elimination or reduction on 42 tariff lines for agricultural imports from Japan valued at $40 million in 2018. The United States will also reduce or eliminate tariffs on certain industrial goods from Japan, such as certain machine tools, fasteners, steam turbines, bicycles, bicycle parts, and musical instruments.

b. The United States–Japan Digital Trade Agreement

As two of the most digitally advanced countries in the world, the United States and Japan share a deep, common interest in establishing enforceable rules that support digitally-enabled suppliers from every sector of their economies to innovate and prosper and in setting standards for other economies to emulate.

The United States–Japan Digital Trade Agreement parallels the USMCA as the most comprehensive and high-standard trade agreement addressing digital trade barriers ever negotiated. This agreement will help

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 9

drive economic prosperity, promote fairer and more balanced trade, and help ensure that shared rules support businesses in key sectors where both countries lead the world in innovation.

Key outcomes of this agreement include rules that achieve the following:

• Prohibiting application of customs duties to digital products distributed electronically, such as e-books, videos, music, software, and games.
• Ensuring non-discriminatory treatment of digital products, including coverage of tax measures.
• Ensuring that data can be transferred across borders, by all suppliers, including financial service suppliers.
• Facilitating digital transactions by permitting the use of electronic authentication and electronic signatures, while protecting confidential information of consumers and businesses and guaranteeing that enforceable consumer protections are applied to the digital marketplace.
• Prohibiting data localization measures that restrict where data can be stored and processed and extending these rules to financial service suppliers in circumstances where a financial regulator has the access to data needed to fulfill its regulatory and supervisory mandate.
• Recognizing rules on civil liability with respect to third-party content for Internet platforms that depend on interaction with users.
• Guaranteeing enforceable consumer protections, including for privacy and unsolicited communication, that apply to the digital marketplace and promoting the interoperability of enforcement regimes.

Together, these provisions set predictable rules of the road and encourage a robust market in digital trade between the two countries – developments that will support increased prosperity and well-paying jobs in the United States and Japan.

The United States looks forward to further negotiations with Japan for a comprehensive agreement that addresses remaining tariff and non-tariff barriers and achieves fairer, more balanced trade.

4. The Administration Has Actively Enforced Trade Agreement Commitments and U.S. Trade Laws

Strong and effective enforcement of trade agreement commitments and U.S. trade laws is a key priority of the President's trade agenda. USTR has continued to pursue cases against foreign trade partners at the World Trade Organization when those trade partners do not comply with WTO commitments. In fact, in 2019 USTR achieved a historic victory in its long-running challenge to unfair European subsidies of Airbus. Under the Trump Administration, USTR has also enforced other trade statutes that had been rarely utilized in the two decades prior to this Administration.

a. The United States Obtained a Historic WTO Award in the Airbus Dispute

In 2018, the WTO Appellate Body confirmed that the EU had failed to comply with an earlier finding that it had to withdraw subsidies to Airbus or remove their adverse effects. In response, the United States sought authorization to impose countermeasures commensurate with the harm caused by the EU's subsidies. The

10 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

EU challenged the amount of adverse effects and commenced a WTO arbitration to determine the appropriate level of countermeasures. In expectation that the arbitration was nearing its end, the Trade Representative announced the initiation of an investigation in April 2019 to enforce U.S. WTO rights. USTR invited public comment on a proposed action to impose ad valorem duties of up to 100 percent on a final list to be drawn from a preliminary list of products imported from the EU.

On October 2, 2019, the WTO Arbitrator issued a report that concluded that the appropriate level of countermeasures is approximately $7.5 billion annually. This is the largest such award in the history of the WTO. Based on the arbitrator's findings, the Trade Representative determined to take action in the form of additional duties at a rate of 10 or 25 percent on large civil aircraft and other products of certain EU Member States with a total annual trade value of $7.5 billion.

While the arbitration over countermeasures was underway, the EU and the Member States commenced a new WTO proceeding, arguing that they had complied by either withdrawing the Airbus subsidies or removing their adverse effects. On December 2, 2019, the WTO panel disagreed and ruled for the United States, finding that the EU actions had in fact expanded the subsidies.

b. The United States Took Strong Action Against Foreign Digital Services Taxes that Discriminate Against American Companies

On March 6, 2019, the government of France released a proposal for a 3 percent levy on revenues that certain companies generate from providing certain digital services to, or aimed at, persons in France (the Digital Services Tax, or the DST). The French parliament passed a final DST bill on July 4, and President Emmanuel Macron signed the bill into law on July 24. The DST applies to revenues from targeted digital advertising and certain "digital interface" services (e.g., online marketplaces for goods and services). The tax applies only to companies with total annual revenues from the covered services of at least €750 million globally and €25 million in France. The tax applied beginning January 1, 2019.

On July 10, 2019, USTR initiated an investigation of the French DST. The notice of initiation in the Federal Register solicited written comments on several aspects of the DST. USTR and the Section 301 Committee convened a public hearing on August 19, 2019. Under Section 303 of the Trade Act, the U.S. Trade Representative requested consultations with the government of France regarding the issues involved in the investigation. Consultations were held on November 14, 2019.

Based on information obtained during the investigation, USTR and the Section 301 Committee prepared a report setting out findings of the investigation. The U.S. Trade Representative determined under sections 301(b) and 304(a) of the Trade Act that the French DST is unreasonable or discriminatory and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce and is thus actionable under section 301(b) of the Trade Act. In particular, the U.S. Trade Representative determined that the French DST is intended to, and by its structure and operation does, discriminate against U.S. digital companies. Further, USTR determined that the DST's retroactive application, application to revenue rather than income, extraterritoriality, and application to only a small group of digital companies contravene prevailing international tax principles and are particularly burdensome for covered U.S. companies.

On December 6, USTR issued a Federal Register notice explaining the determination and soliciting public comments on a proposed trade action of additional duties on certain French products, as well as on the option of imposing fees or restrictions on French services. USTR and the Section 301 Committee convened a public hearing on January 7 and 8, 2020. Since the United States launched this action, France has committed not to collect the DST while negotiations on international taxation are ongoing at the OECD this year.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 11

USTR is continuing to analyze measures of other countries that are similar to the French DST and all legal options for responding to such measures. This may include launching investigations of other unilateral DSTs under section 301 of the Trade Act.

c. The United States and EU Entered Into an Agreement on Market Access for U.S. Beef Exports

In August 2019, the United States entered into an agreement with the EU that increases U.S. access to Europe's beef market through a duty-free tariff rate quota (TRQ) exclusively for the United States. The U.S.-only TRQ will provide U.S. ranchers access to a 35,000 metric ton duty-free annual quota that is estimated to be worth an estimated $350 million to $500 million at the end of the seven-year phase-in period.

The agreement stemmed from a culmination of years of litigation at the WTO by the United States that successfully challenged a non-science-based ban on the use of hormones in cattle production.

d. The United States Obtained Other Significant Litigation Victories at the WTO

USTR had two major victories against China on agriculture disputes in 2019. In February, the United States won an important WTO dispute on China's excessive and trade distorting domestic support to its grain producers. The WTO panel found that China's market price support policies for wheat and rice were far in excess of the levels China agreed to when it joined the WTO. China's market price support policy artificially raises Chinese prices for grains above market levels, creating non-market incentives for increased Chinese production of agricultural products and reduced imports.

On April 18, the United States won a WTO dispute challenging China's administration of its tariff-rate quotas (TRQ) for wheat, corn, and rice. The panel found that China's administration is not transparent, predictable, or fair, and that it inhibits the filling of these TRQs. USDA estimates that if China's TRQs had been filled, China would have imported as much as $3.5 billion worth of corn, wheat and rice in 2015 alone. In the context of negotiations with China for the Phase One Agreement, China agreed not to appeal either of these reports and agreed to come into compliance within a short period of time.

USTR also achieved success in a challenge to India's export subsidies. USTR launched this dispute in 2017 against India's prohibited export subsidies for a variety of products, including steel, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, information technology products, textiles, and apparel. In October 2019, the WTO panel found for the United States with respect to all five of the programs that were challenged. USTR estimates the value of the subsidies provided by these programs to be approximately $7 billion annually. India appealed virtually the entire decision, and USTR is continuing to pursue its interests in this matter.

USTR is also vigorously pursuing disputes launched against five WTO Members that imposed retaliatory duties on U.S. products in response to the President's action on steel and aluminum under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. These Members––China, the EU, Turkey, Russia, and India––have enacted contrived "safeguards rebalancing" measures not permitted under WTO rules.

e. USTR Took Actions to Enforce Free-Trade Agreements

For too long, the United States failed to take steps to ensure that other nations followed through on the promises they made in trade agreements with the United States, either turning a blind eye to noncompliance or engaging in endless years of talk but no action. That failed approach has ended, and the United States will aggressively enforce its trade agreements. Over the last year, the United States initiated two actions to enforce environmental provisions in its free trade agreements. In July, the United States took action to enforce the United States–Peru Trade Agreement and blocked timber imports from a Peruvian company

12 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

based on illegally harvested timber found in its supply chain. In September, USTR initiated the first-ever environmental consultations under the United States–Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS) in an effort to combat illegal fishing. In these cases, our trading partners came into compliance with their obligations rather than face further trade action by the United States.

f. Utilizing Safeguard Laws to Support U.S. Companies Harmed by Import Surges

Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 allows the United States to introduce temporary "safeguards" as relief to a domestic industry that has been harmed by increased imports. The Administration took two such safeguard actions in 2018. Specifically, after an investigation, the International Trade Commission determined that increased imports of solar products and residential washing machines caused serious injury to U.S. producers. President Trump exercised his authority under Section 201 and increased tariffs on solar cells and modules and on imported washing machines. Both USTR and the International Trade Commission continued to monitor these safeguards in 2019, and the President made certain modifications to the residential washing machines safeguard to improve its effectiveness.

g. Ensuring Appropriate Application of Trade Preference Programs

The Administration took additional action in 2019 to ensure that U.S. trade preference programs are applied appropriately and in a manner that advances U.S. interests. The United States terminated preference programs for India and Turkey under the General System of Preferences (GSP) program because those two countries no longer met the criteria for inclusion in the GSP program. Specifically, an investigation led by USTR to findings that India had implemented a wide variety of trade barriers that harmed United States commerce and was failing to provide the United States with reasonable assurance of access to its markets. Turkey graduated from GSP eligibility based upon a number of factors that showed that Turkey had attained a higher level of economic development and is competitive enough to no longer need preferential access to the U.S. market. The Administration also removed a third of Thailand's GSP benefits for failure to fully comply with the labor standards criterion and successfully closed cases related to minimum working age in Bolivia, labor standards in Iraq, and ratification of international copyright treaties in Uzbekistan and partially closed a case related to protection of IP rights in Ukraine.

USTR is continuing the program the Administration launched in 2017 to ensure that all 119 GSP beneficiary countries are assessed for compliance with the program's 15 statutory criteria. Over the last year, the United States held hearings on GSP programs for 11 countries undergoing formal reviews of benefits under the criteria dealing with labor standards, market access, intellectual property rights protection, and arbitral awards.

h. The Administration Utilized Trade Remedy Laws to Benefit American Industry

The Administration has also continued its robust enforcement of U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty laws. In 2019, the Department of Commerce initiated 33 antidumping (AD) investigations and issued 30 antidumping orders. Commerce initiated 20 countervailing duty (CVD) investigations and issued 17 CVD orders. The AD/CVD orders concern a wide range of imported products, including large diameter welded pipe, steel trailer wheels, rubber bands, strontium chromate, quartz, glycine, and others.

The AD/CVD law includes a "de minimis" provision and provides a more generous de minimis for least-developed or developing countries. Section 771(36) of the Tariff Act of 1930 directs USTR to make these designations and to update them as necessary, based on "economic, trade, and other factors the Trade Representative considers appropriate." This list had last been updated in 1998, and in February 2020, USTR published in the Federal Register an updated list of WTO Members that, for purposes of U.S. CVD investigations, qualify as least developed or developing. The designation entitles countries to lower

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 13

thresholds in determining whether countervailable subsidies are de minimis or whether subsidized import volumes are negligible.

USTR took this action to account for developments since USTR last published the list in 1998, more than 20 years ago. In designating developing Members, USTR took into consideration: (i) World Bank designation as high-income based on gross national income; (ii) share of world trade greater than 0.5 percent; (iii) EU membership; (iv) OECD membership or application for membership; (v) G20 membership; and (vi) whether in its WTO accession the Member had declared itself to be a developing country.

5. The United States Led Efforts to Change the World Trade Organization

The United States has engaged extensively with WTO Members on a range of issues, including concerns with WTO dispute settlement, and has worked to facilitate implementation of existing WTO rules, bring forward new ideas and proposals on reform, and advance ongoing negotiations.

a. The United States Directed Attention to the Overreach and Rule-Breaking of the WTO's Appellate Body

For more than two decades, presidents and Members of Congress of both parties in the United States have raised concerns about the functioning of the WTO's dispute settlement system. The concerns have focused on the WTO's Appellate Body. The Appellate Body was created by WTO Members for a limited purpose, but over time it ceased to comply with WTO rules, expanded its role, misinterpreted WTO agreements, and undermined the authority of WTO Members and the WTO's role as a forum for negotiations. Unfortunately, years of talking about these problems accomplished little. The Trump Administration took action by exercising its right as a WTO Member to decline to approve new Appellate Body members, forcing the WTO to engage in a long-overdue debate about the role of the Appellate Body. Throughout 2019, the United States submitted numerous statements to the WTO setting forth the myriad ways the Appellate Body had gone astray.

These efforts culminated recently with the issuance of USTR's Report on the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization. The Report first detailed the Appellate Body's repeated failure to apply the rules of the WTO agreements in a manner that adheres to the text of those agreements as negotiated and agreed by WTO Members. For example:

• The Appellate Body consistently ignored deadlines imposed on it by Members.
• The Appellate Body allowed former Appellate Body members to rule on disputes long after their terms had ended.
• The Appellate Body second-guessed factual determinations by WTO dispute settlement panels, in clear violation of a limit placed on the body by Members.
• The Appellate Body sought to create a type of "WTO jurisprudence" by declaring that its decisions should be treated as precedent and opining on matters within the authority of WTO Members and outside the authority of the Appellate Body.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 14

The Report also detailed ways in which the Appellate Body's persistent overreaching had taken away Members' rights and imposed new obligations on those Members through erroneous interpretations of WTO agreements. For example:

• The Appellate Body interpreted the term "public body" in an unduly narrow fashion that threatened the ability of market economies to counteract trade-distorting subsidies provided by non-market economies.
• The Appellate Body intruded on Members' legitimate policy space by essentially converting a non-discrimination obligation for regulations into a "detrimental impact" test.
• The Appellate Body consistently limited trade remedies, undermining the ability of the United States and other countries to counteract injurious dumping and subsidies.

The United States presented the results of its study to other WTO Members, Congress, and the United States public in order to compel a discussion on how the WTO ended up at this unsustainable position, in hopes that WTO Members may reach agreement on a way forward that will restore confidence in the WTO and a fair trading system.

b. The United States Pushed Improvements in Transparency and Compliance with Notification Obligations.

A key reform initiative of the United States is improving transparency and compliance with basic notification obligations. It is difficult, if not impossible, to negotiate new rules on issues like agricultural subsidies or industrial subsidies when WTO Members do not have data on what the largest subsidizers in the world are doing. To get this kind of information, WTO Members need to fulfill their existing notification obligations. Unfortunately, compliance has been woefully inadequate.

The United States was the first WTO Member to table a transparency proposal that establishes appropriate consequences for chronic non-compliance with existing notification obligations. Several co-sponsors have now joined the proposal, and the United States is actively engaging other Members.

One element of the proposal is to encourage the use of counter-notifications. This is a mechanism already used by the United States, but could be more widely employed by others. To improve transparency under the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, the United States has submitted five counter-notifications on China's subsidy programs; nearly 500 Chinese subsidy measures have been counter-notified in total. In addition, the United States has sought transparency in the area of agricultural domestic support by submitting three counter-notifications on India's market price support programs for wheat, rice, cotton and pulses.

c. The United States Proposed Updating Special and Differential Designations So That the WTO Can Reflect Current Economic Realities.

For too long, many WTO Members have sought to opt out of WTO rules or maintain flexibilities they no longer need, rather than embrace these WTO rules as promoting economic development. The rules of the WTO are meant to encourage stronger economic growth for everyone, and Members should want to implement these rules fully if they are truly committed to openness.

The WTO is the only economic institution that permits its Members to self-declare their development status. There are no economic indicators or other measurements of what constitutes a developing country at the WTO. Countries merely need to state that they are "developing," regardless of their GDP or role in global

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 15

trade, and are afforded flexibilities from WTO rules, which could take the form of transition periods, higher tariff bindings, or the ability to use prohibited subsidies, among others. The refusal of Members to acknowledge their current status has paralyzed the WTO's negotiation function.

The United States believes that full implementation of WTO rules benefits all WTO Members. While the United States understands that some Members may still require special and differential treatment, this does not justify the current situation at the WTO – where some of the world's richest and most powerful economies have claimed blanket "special and differential treatment" due to their self-declared "developing country" status.

In order to address this critical problem, the United States provided an analytical paper highlighting how the global economic landscape has changed dramatically from 1995 to the present time. The paper shows that a number of countries that plausibly could present themselves at the WTO as "developing" in 1995 can no longer plausibly do so. The paper also demonstrates how the lack of differentiation among self-declared developing countries has severely damaged the institution's negotiating function. Following the distribution of this analytical paper, the United States then submitted a proposed General Council decision that would establish objective criteria for determining whether a WTO Member may continue to avail itself of blanket, open-ended "special and differential treatment" in current and future WTO negotiations. While some countries have responded positively by giving up "developing" status, there is much work left to do on this front.

d. The United States Is Working With Other Members on High-Standard E-Commerce and Digital Trade Initiatives.

The United States is also actively engaged in the Joint Statement Initiative on E-Commerce and Digital Trade where it is advancing proposals that seek to expand access to digital technologies around the world, lower costs for businesses and consumers, and provide a more transparent and predictable trading environment. The United States has proposed rules in all key areas of digital trade, such as those related to cross-border data flows, privacy, source code, and cybersecurity, to help ensure that digital trade can continue to drive economic growth and development and support the success of firms of all sizes, across all sectors, around the world.

Over the past year, the United States has been working closely with other participants in the Joint Statement Initiative to produce a consolidated text that furthers our progress toward a high-standard WTO agreement on digital trade. The United States has been consistent in its view that this agreement must be reciprocal, meaning that all obligations apply to all participants. The United States also considers that this effort can set a positive precedent for future plurilateral efforts at the WTO.

e. The United States Is Actively Pushing to Finalize a Robust Multilateral Fisheries Agreement.

The United States has been engaged to advance the ongoing fisheries subsidies negotiations. A successful outcome in these negotiations has enormous institutional importance for the WTO. As the only active multilateral negotiation at the WTO, it will be a test whether the institution is still capable of achieving meaningful multilateral outcomes. Unfortunately, many Members remain more focused on protecting their fisheries subsidies programs rather than reducing or eliminating them. The United States is aiming high to achieve meaningful reductions in these harmful subsidies and is imposing real constraints on the world's largest subsidizers.

16 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

B. The President Will Continue and Expand an America-First Trade Agenda

Even with all of the successes that President Trump achieved in implementing his trade agenda, there is much more to come. Over the coming year, the Administration will focus on new trade agreements that benefit all Americans, enforcing the nation's trade laws to ensure its trading partners play by the rules, and updating the World Trade Organization.

1. The Administration Will Pursue Trade Agreements that Benefit All Americans

In the last two years, the Administration has entered into new trade agreements with Mexico, Canada, China, South Korea, and Japan. These five countries represent more than 50 percent of U.S. goods trade volume. The United States will continue to pursue balanced and reciprocal trade agreements with important trade and strategic partners, including the United Kingdom (UK), the EU, and Kenya. Further negotiations with Japan and China are also on the horizon.

a. United Kingdom

Throughout 2019, the Trump Administration took numerous steps to pave the way for negotiating a trade agreement with the UK once it exited the EU and regained trade authority. Preparatory steps included review of public comments, a public hearing, and extensive consultations with congressional and trade advisory committees on U.S. negotiating objectives and positions. On February 28, 2019, USTR published detailed negotiating objectives for a United States-United Kingdom trade agreement.

As part of a trade agreement with the United Kingdom, the United States seeks to eliminate certain tariff and non-tariff barriers and aims to achieve a fairer and deeper trade relationship with the UK. The negotiating objectives cover the gamut of trade issues: trade in goods; sanitary and phytosanitary measures; customs and trade facilitation; rules of origin; technical barriers to trade; good regulatory practices; transparency, publication, and administration measures; trade in services, including telecommunications and financial services; digital trade and cross-border data flows; investment; intellectual property; procedural fairness for pharmaceuticals and medical devices; state-owned and controlled enterprises; subsidies; competition policy; labor; environment; anticorruption; trade remedies; government procurement; small and medium-sized enterprises; currency; and dispute settlement.

The United States is committed to concluding trade agreement negotiations with the United Kingdom with timely and substantive results for U.S. consumers, businesses, farmers, ranchers and workers, consistent with U.S. priorities and the negotiating objectives established by Congress in U.S. law.

b. Kenya

President Trump announced on February 6, 2020 that the United States intends to initiate trade agreement negotiations with the Republic of Kenya. The President's announcement came immediately following a meeting he held at the White House with Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta and while the third meeting of the United States–Kenya Trade and Investment Working Group was taking place in Washington. President Trump and President Kenyatta established the Working Group in August 2018 to explore ways to deepen the trade and investment ties between our two countries and to lay the groundwork for a stronger trade relationship in the future.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 17

In pursuing negotiations on a trade agreement with Kenya, the Trump Administration is responding to Congress' support, as expressed in the African Growth and Opportunity Act, to negotiate reciprocal and mutually beneficial trade agreements that serve the interests of both the United States and the countries of sub-Saharan Africa.

A trade agreement between the United States and Kenya will complement Africa's regional integration efforts, including the landmark African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). The Administration envisions a trade agreement with Kenya that can serve as a model for additional agreements in Africa, leading to a network of agreements that contribute to Africa's regional integration objectives and serve as an enduring foundation to expand U.S.-Africa trade and investment across the continent. At the annual AGOA Forum in Côte d'Ivoire in August 2019, the United States and the African Union signed a joint statement concerning the development of the AfCFTA, reflecting our common goal to deepen trade and investment relationships across the continent. In the joint statement, the United States pledged its continued support to help the AfCFTA achieve its fullest potential.

A trade agreement between the United States and Kenya will also be positive for the U.S. economy. Africa is growing rapidly and presents enormous opportunities for U.S. commercial and economic interests. The continent is undergoing a transformative change toward greater regional integration, as evidenced by the AfCFTA, and has among the highest growth rates globally. Africa will account for nearly a fifth of the world's consumers by 2030. The United States seeks to support higher-paying jobs in the United States and grow the U.S. economy by improving our trade and investment opportunities with Kenya and other African countries.

The Trump Administration will consult closely with Congress in developing U.S. negotiating positions with respect to Kenya in order to ensure that they are consistent with Congressional priorities and objectives outlined in Section 102 of the Trade Priorities and Accountability Act.

c. European Union

In a trade agreement with the EU, the United States seeks to eliminate EU barriers to its markets and seeks a more balanced trade relationship. For many years, U.S. businesses have been at a disadvantage in doing business in the EU. Both tariff and non-tariff barriers in the EU have led to increasing, and unsustainable, trade deficits with the EU. In particular, the goods trade deficit with the EU rose to $179 billion in 2019. With a recent change in administration in the EU, and the appointment of a new Trade Commissioner, the United States is hopeful that it can make more progress in the coming year than has been possible in prior years.

d. Japan

The United States and Japan will seek to build on the accomplishments of the past year's agreements and work toward a comprehensive agreement that promotes mutually beneficial, fair, and reciprocal trade. As agreed by our Leaders, the two countries intend to enter into further negotiations on customs duties and other restrictions on trade, barriers to trade in services and investment, and other issues.

e. China

The United States and China will continue negotiations in furtherance of reaching a "Phase Two" trade agreement. Key issues to address will include overcapacity, subsidization, disciplines on China's state-owned enterprises, and cyber theft.

18 | THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

2. The Administration Will Continue to Enforce Trade Agreements and U.S. Trade Laws Vigorously

The Trump Administration will continue to aggressively enforce U.S. trade laws to protect the interests of American businesses and workers. USTR will take strong actions to ensure our trading partners compliance with the terms of our trade agreements, including the WTO agreements.

The China Phase One Agreement provides the United States with a process for ensuring that China honors its commitments and for imposing proportionate measures if it fails to do so. USTR will closely monitor China's compliance with the Agreement's provisions and will investigate complaints from American businesses, farmers, and others about China's conduct. Likewise, the USMCA contains a detailed process for enforcing commitments, and USTR will zealously pursue any violations of the agreement. USTR has established working groups focused in particular on potential violations of the labor and environmental provisions of USMCA and will work closely with other agencies to ensure that any potential noncompliance is investigated and, where necessary, acted upon.

As necessary, USTR will pursue formal challenges to acts, policies, or practices of foreign governments that are inconsistent with WTO rules under the dispute settlement system of the WTO and will vigorously defend U.S. actions when challenged by foreign governments. Where appropriate, USTR may take action under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 or recommend action under other statutory authorities granted to the President.

USTR is closely monitoring legislative developments in countries related to "digital services taxes." The United States is engaged in discussions at the OECD to modernize and rationalize taxation of multinational entities in a way that is fair to all countries, their consumers, and their businesses. As noted above, however, some nations have undermined those efforts by imposing unilateral digital services taxes, which often are little more than thinly disguised attacks on successful U.S. technology companies. The United States will continue to enforce its trade laws to prevent the implementation of unfair and discriminatory taxes on U.S. companies.

3. The Administration Will Push for a WTO that Reflects Current Economic Realities and Strengthens Free-Market Economies

The United States will continue to lead the effort on WTO reform. In addition to addressing the Appellate Body, seeking a new fisheries agreement, pursuing a digital commerce agreement, enforcing notifications obligations, and seeking reform of "special and differential treatment" for "developing" countries, the United States will advocate for other changes at the WTO that will have the WTO working for its Members. A number of features at the WTO reflect out-of-date assumptions and do not reflect current realities. The United States has already submitted papers focused on market access and tariff issues with the intent of updating our understanding of the current state of agriculture trade and the challenges farmers are facing today. Through our agriculture "reset" efforts, the United States is trying to break the bad habit of taking the same entrenched positions and expecting a different outcome.

The United States will also explore a broader reset at the WTO. The WTO currently locks-in outdated tariff determinations that no longer reflect deliberate policy choices and economic realities. As a result, many countries that have large economies that have developed significantly over the past two decades continue to maintain very high bound tariff rates, far in excess of the rates applied by the United States or to which the United States is bound. For example, the U.S. average bound tariff rate and applied Most Favored Nation rate are both 3.4 percent. In comparison, Brazil's bound tariff rate is 31.4 percent, and its applied rate is 13 percent. India's bound and applied tariff rates are 48.5 percent and 17 percent, respectively.

THE PRESIDENT'S 2020 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 19

Members need to fundamentally rethink tariffs and their role, recognizing that commitments on tariffs should reflect current economic conditions.

In addition, the United States will continue to push for a close review of the WTO's budget, which, as demonstrated by egregious Appellate Body member salaries, requires greater scrutiny. The WTO must ensure that there is accountability and that expenditures reflect the priorities of its Members.

Finally, the United States will advocate for changes that allow for additional and more effective plurilateral agreements. There is an urgent need for a new political and legal understanding at the WTO that enables the pursuit of less-than-fully multilateral outcomes while preserving the characteristics of the WTO.

CONCLUSION

Over the last year, the Trump Administration delivered on the President's promise to pursue a trade policy agenda that puts American workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses first. The President's aggressive enforcement of trade laws led to a historic trade agreement with China, where, for the first time, China has made specific, enforceable commitments to cease its harmful trade practices. In addition, the President replaced NAFTA with a balanced and modern trade agreement with Canada and Mexico, the USMCA. The President also entered into new agreements with Japan and other allies and pursued an aggressive enforcement strategy. The Administration will continue to implement the President's America-First trade agenda in 2020 by taking aggressive enforcement actions against countries that engage in unfair trading practices and entering into fair and reciprocal agreements with our trading partners that lead to real benefits for all Americans.