INTRODUCTION

Since President Trump took office, Americans have benefited from an improving economy. In 2016, U.S. gross domestic product grew by only 1.6 percent. But in 2017, that figure grew to 2.2 percent. And last year, U.S. gross domestic product grew by 2.9 percent – higher than that of any other G-7 country. Over the last two years, the United States has created 4.8 million new jobs, including over 450,000 new manufacturing jobs. Not only are more Americans working, but Americans are also taking home bigger paychecks. Nominal average hourly earnings for American workers rose by 3.3 percent from December 2017 to December 2018. Inflation also remained in check – with prices increasing by only 1.9 percent since December 2017.

Americans who trade have shared in this growth. In 2017, U.S. merchandise exports totaled $1.6 trillion, more than six percent higher than 2016 levels. Over the same period, U.S. services exports rose 5.1 percent, an increase of nearly $40 billion. In 2018, U.S. exports rose even further. By November 2018 – the last month for which data is available – U.S. exports of goods and services were up seven percent from the same period in 2017. American export growth in 2018 included increases in U.S. exports of autos, foods and beverages, and industrial supplies, as compared to their levels during the first eleven months of 2017. Imports have also grown. In 2017, the United States imported more than $2.3 trillion in goods– an increase of seven percent from 2016 levels. By November 2018 – the last month for which data is available as of February 2019 – U.S. imports had increased a further eight percent over their 2017 levels for the same period. These facts show that under the policies of the Trump Administration, U.S. trade has grown significantly.

This recent trade growth has contributed to a historic streak of positive job gains. U.S. job creation grew from 2.2 million in 2017 to 2.7 million in 2018. Over 2018, job growth averaged 223,000 jobs per month. Significantly, this growth was consistently solid throughout 2018, as the U.S. economy added over 100,000 jobs every month over the year. Notably, 2018 marks only the second time since 2000 that such consistent job growth has occurred for a full calendar year.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 2

This 2018 job growth includes significant gains in manufacturing employment. Manufacturing has been a bright spot since President Trump's election. From 2013 to 2016, the United States created an average of 8,000 manufacturing jobs per month. In the two years of the Trump Administration, that average has grown to approximately 20,000 manufacturing jobs per month. Last year, the U.S. created 264,000 new manufacturing jobs, the largest such increase in 21 years.

These data indicate that the United States has made great strides in dealing with the challenges of globalization – challenges that have bedeviled most of the developed world in recent years. Over the last two years, the United States has shown that a developed country can experience broad economic growth that is shared by workers – including workers in the manufacturing sector.

Trade policy plays a vital role in this effort. Under the leadership of President Trump, American trade policy is generating benefits for American workers. While much remains to be done, the Administration has already made significant progress toward implementing its trade agenda. Our goal is to ensure that hard work and innovation are rewarded, while unfair trade practices and illegal government subsidies are punished. As our policies continue to take effect, we are confident that American workers and businesses will benefit from the chance to compete in a fairer world.

As described below, the Trump Administration inherited a significantly flawed trading system, with problems that affected U.S. trade agreements as well as global trade institutions. That system rewarded countries like China that engaged in unfair and market-distorting trading practices – from industrial subsidies to theft of intellectual property. That system also encouraged outsourcing of manufacturing jobs to countries with significantly weaker labor and environmental standards than the United States. These and other flaws were hurting U.S. businesses and workers – and leading to concerns about globalization throughout the developed world. When President Trump took office, the U.S. manufacturing sector had endured massive job losses, and wages had stagnated or even declined for many American families.

Faced with this crisis, the Trump Administration took immediate and decisive action to implement a new trade agenda. The Administration withdrew the United States from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and engaged with strategic U.S. trading partners to renegotiate existing agreements and negotiate new agreements. These agreements will ensure that American workers and businesses can reap their share of the benefits of trade. The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) and other parts of the Administration have used both domestic laws and international fora to press U.S. trade priorities and enforce trade commitments made by America's trading partners. In 2019, the Administration will continue this work and take further steps to rebalance America's trade relationships and the global economy.

For too long, workers here and throughout the developed world have been frustrated by elected officials who talk about the problems resulting from globalization – but do nothing about them. For too long, policymakers here and throughout the developed world have been intimidated by the claim that any effort to shift trade policy in a more worker-friendly direction represents some type of Smoot-Hawley style "protectionism." But this is nonsense – recent events demonstrate that by using its leverage as the world's largest market, the United States can create better conditions for U.S. workers, and encourage more efficient global markets.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 3

Under President Trump's leadership, the United States is now charting a course that leads to stronger growth – and better jobs – for all Americans. The Trump Administration has promoted economic growth through historic tax reform and a policy of deregulation that encourage more business activity in the United States. But the Trump Administration has also used the leverage of the U.S. market to obtain fairer and better treatment for U.S. companies and workers to do more business in markets around the world. As a result, the United States now has an economy that is not only growing faster than that of any other G-7 country – but is also generating new opportunities for the type of blue-collar workers and middle-class families who have far too often been left behind.

This year presents exciting opportunities for U.S. trade policy. The Administration is urging Congress to approve the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) – a new trade regime for North America that will treat American workers and businesses much better than the outdated NAFTA. The Administration continues to press China to address long-standing U.S. concerns about unfair practices in that country. The Administration intends to launch new trade negotiations with Japan, the European Union, and the United Kingdom to provide even more opportunities for U.S. workers and exporters. All of this effort is part of an ongoing upgrade to adjust U.S. trade policy to the realities of the 21st century economy. As that upgrade continues, the new jobs and higher wages that we have seen so far are only the beginning of what Americans can accomplish.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 4

REBALANCING TRADE TO BENEFIT AMERICANS:
THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA

In outlining the President's Trade Policy Agenda, we wish to emphasize three major points. First, President Trump inherited a deeply flawed global trading system that put U.S. companies and workers at an unfair disadvantage – and discouraged true market competition. Second, under President Trump's leadership, the Administration has undertaken a major revision of U.S. trade obligations – as well as much stricter enforcement of U.S. trade laws – to create a fairer and more efficient global economy. Third, the Administration will continue pursuing new trade deals – and stronger enforcement – throughout 2019.

A. The Administration Inherited a Trade System With Many Problems

For many years after World War II, the United States benefited from a global trading system that generally encouraged more efficient markets here and around the world. By the time President Trump took office, however, significant flaws in that system were hurting American workers and businesses. Existing trade agreements were imbalanced and outdated, and efforts to negotiate new rules within the multilateral trading system had failed. American workers and businesses were suffering. In fact, the global trading system appeared to be tilted in favor of non-market economies like China. Furthermore, the United States was considering whether to join the TPP – a deal that would have made these trends even worse. Each of these points is discussed in more detail below.

1. Outdated and Imbalanced Trade Agreements

President Trump inherited trade agreements that were outdated and imbalanced. Furthermore, these agreements had failed to deliver promised benefits to U.S. businesses and workers. Such flaws were particularly present in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the United States-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS).

a. NAFTA

When NAFTA went into force on January 1, 1994, many pundits and policymakers assured American workers that the agreement would create a massive number of new jobs, and that the United States would enjoy expanding trade surpluses with Mexico upon implementation. President Bill Clinton, who signed the bill that approved NAFTA, declared further that NAFTA's side agreements on the environment and labor would make it a "force for social progress as well as economic growth."

Unfortunately for the American people, these promises were not fulfilled. In fact, NAFTA brought reduced opportunities for many Americans. According to one study, NAFTA reduced the wage growth

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 5

of certain American blue-collar workers in highly affected industries by 16 percent. Further, NAFTA contained terms that incentivized companies across the United States to outsource production, especially to Mexico. Such results were encouraged by the fact that under NAFTA, labor rights and environmental protection provisions were merely aspirational and unenforceable.

Furthermore, the U.S. goods trade balance with Mexico – which had been in surplus each of the three years before NAFTA entered into force – soured almost immediately after NAFTA's implementation. The United States had a trade deficit in goods with Mexico of more than $15 billion in 1995, and that deficit grew to more than $70 billion by 2017. Remarkably, Mexican workers saw little benefit from this change. Mexican manufacturing wages, in U.S. dollars, have not risen to converge with U.S. and Canadian rates, and the gap between the countries remains comparable to that when NAFTA passed. Remarkably, although NAFTA's flaws had been apparent for decades, when President Trump took office there had been no major changes to the agreement since it entered into force in 1994.

b. KORUS

KORUS, which entered into force in 2012, also failed to bring about promised benefits. KORUS was estimated to increase U.S. exports to Korea by around $10 billion, and to bring about substantial improvements to Korea's regulatory environment. Increases in U.S. imports from Korea as a result of KORUS, by contrast, were expected to be modest. After nearly six years, however, KORUS's record was disappointing.

With over 90 percent of two-way trade in goods free of tariffs, U.S. exports of goods to Korea had risen by less than $5 billion in 2017, as compared to 2011 levels. By contrast, U.S. imports of Korean goods had grown by approximately $15 billion over the same period. By 2017, the U.S. goods deficit with Korea had increased by 73 percent since KORUS came into effect. Meanwhile, U.S. stakeholders expressed concern that Korea had failed to fully implement its obligations under KORUS in areas such as automobiles, labor, competition, customs, pharmaceuticals, and medical devices.

2. A failing multilateral trade system

Meanwhile, President Trump inherited a multilateral trade system that had largely broken down. No new significant multilateral market access agreement has been made at the World Trade Organization (WTO) since it was formed in 1994. The last major effort to reach such an agreement – the Doha Round – collapsed in 2008. While a few members are still trying to revive the Doha Round, such an effort would be a mistake – the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) is outdated and fails to properly address modern issues such as digital trade. Indeed, Ministers at the WTO's Tenth Ministerial Conference in December 2015 – more than a year before President Trump took office – collectively acknowledged that there was no consensus to reaffirm the DDA's mandates. Some WTO rules are unable to keep up with modern

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 6

economic challenges and today's unfair trade practices. The WTO's inability to adequately differentiate among developing country Members, combined with misaligned expectations about which Members should contribute to negotiated outcomes, are among the factors accounting for the WTO's lack of achievements in new negotiations.

Another important reason for the failure of multilateral negotiations is that judicial activism at the WTO's Appellate Body tempted countries to demand special privileges through litigation – rather than seeking to build consensus through negotiation. For many years, the WTO Appellate Body repeatedly seized more power for itself – while undermining and disregarding the very rules under which the dispute settlement system was created. The Appellate Body's actions led to a lack of trust in the decisions that emerged from its process. Years of complaints by prior U.S. Administrations about activism at the Appellate Body were ignored. Furthermore, this activism had the disastrous effect of making it harder for market-based countries like the United States to push back against unfair practices abroad and discouraged them from adjusting their own trade policies in response to growing concerns about globalization. In fact, one of the most striking developments of recent years is that while the United States has long expressed concerns about the Appellate Body, China – an enormous non-market economy – advocates for giving that body even more power over trade policy.

3. Unfair trade that harmed U.S. workers and businesses

Due to the failures of U.S. trade agreements and the multilateral trading system, many American workers and businesses were suffering significant harm when the Administration came into office. As described below, non-market policies by China and other countries had led to global overcapacity in key industries such as steel and aluminum. Meanwhile, China was engaging in a widespread campaign to obtain valuable U.S. intellectual property, denying American innovators the full value of their inventions and damaging the U.S. economy as a whole. In addition, some U.S. trading partners were disregarding certain labor and environmental obligations, and American farmers faced non-science-based barriers to the export of their goods.

a. Non-market policies causing overcapacity

When the Trump Administration took office, key American industries such as steel and aluminum faced massive global overcapacity due to non-market-oriented policies of China and other countries. This overcapacity had already contributed to closures of U.S. steel mills and aluminum smelters, and had made the U.S. economy increasingly reliant on imports of steel and aluminum. The domestic steel industry lost 14,100 American jobs in 2015 and 2016. Capacity utilization of American steel mills was only 69.4 percent in 2016, a level that inhibited efficient operations and discouraged American steel companies from investing in research and development. Meanwhile, China and other steel-producing nations dramatically increased their production capacity – despite growing evidence of global overcapacity. By 2016, China had enough capacity to produce as much steel as the rest of the world combined.

The U.S. aluminum industry faced similar problems. Between 2000 and 2017, 18 of 23 U.S. aluminum smelters shut down, and between 2013 and 2016 alone, the primary aluminum sector in the United States lost around 8,000 American jobs. Although the United States had been the world's largest producer of aluminum in 2000, by 2016, U.S. aluminum accounted for just 1.5 percent of global production. In 2016 and 2017, when aluminum prices neared record lows, U.S. aluminum production was only about

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 7

half of its 2015 levels. Meanwhile, China – which had accounted for less than 15 percent of global aluminum production in 2000 – made roughly 55 percent of the world's aluminum in 2016.

In short, the Trump Administration inherited a severe overcapacity crisis in both steel and aluminum – a pair of crises for which the multilateral trading system had no good answers. Efforts to work with other countries on these issues – such as the Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity established by the G-20 in 2016 – had done nothing to stop the problems described above. Furthermore, if these problems were not addressed, the United States would likely see similar difficulties in numerous other industries – as the same non-market practices that contributed to excess capacity in steel and aluminum would likely take place in other industries. Thus, it was vital for the Administration to convince markets – and its trading partners – that this type of behavior would lead to severe consequences.

b. China's attacks on U.S. innovation

Meanwhile, the United States faced another major crisis that threatened the very future of its economy. For a country like ours that depends on innovation and creativity for much of its economic growth, strong protection of intellectual property and technology is vital. But the Trump Administration inherited a situation in which China was using a variety of unfair and market-distorting tactics to take valuable U.S. intellectual property. These tactics included joint venture requirements and other foreign investment restrictions, which effectively pressured U.S. investors in China to partner with Chinese companies and provided these Chinese "partners" access to the intellectual property of their U.S. counterparts. Furthermore, when U.S. intellectual property owners were permitted to license their technology in China, they had to do so under discriminatory regulations that barred U.S. owners from receiving market-rate returns. China had also implemented outbound foreign investment programs to obtain U.S. intellectual property through the acquisition of targeted U.S. companies. Finally, in repeated cyber intrusions into U.S. commercial networks, the Chinese government had targeted the business confidential information and other sensitive data of American companies – despite pledges not to do so.

Together, these developments represented a severe threat to the U.S. economy and the future prosperity of all Americans. Technology and intellectual property play a vital role in the U.S. economy – supporting some 45.5 million American jobs and accounting for over 38 percent of U.S. GDP and 52 percent of U.S. exports. In addition, China's policies effectively deprived U.S. companies of the full value of their intellectual property and technology, and inhibited U.S. companies from fairly competing in China's large market. Theft of U.S. intellectual property was also threatening American companies' technological competitive edge in global markets by denying fair returns for American intellectual property investment and discouraging reinvestment in future innovations.

Once again, the multilateral trading system offered no practical solution for the United States. Many of the worst actions undertaken by China – such as the numerous informal methods of pressuring U.S. companies to share their technology with Chinese partners – were not captured by China's obligations at the WTO. Furthermore, key U.S. trading partners showed little willingness to take practical steps to pressure China on these issues. Nevertheless, the United States had to find some way to persuade China to stop its predatory actions.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 8

c. Trading partners' disregard of labor and environmental obligations

Separately, when the Trump Administration took office, U.S. trading partners were taking advantage of weak labor and environmental obligations to take jobs from the United States. In Mexico, for example, the government's failure to consistently enforce labor laws and protect worker rights left workers with little recourse regarding violations of freedom of association, poor working conditions, and other labor problems. Among other problems, union leadership in Mexico was elected without majority worker support, and collective bargaining agreements were imposed without worker support. Such policies and practices have kept Mexican workers' wages low, and harmed workers and their families on both sides of the border. Furthermore, these practices encouraged companies to outsource production to Mexico, in the hopes that they could reduce costs by using low-wage labor. These facts help to explain why Mexican wages remained stagnant for years, even as the U.S. trade deficit with Mexico surged.

Meanwhile, in Peru, the Trump Administration inherited a situation where there was strong evidence that illegal logging continued in Peru despite the forestry obligations in the U.S.-Peru Free Trade Agreement. In 2015, the Department of Homeland Security in Houston detained and ultimately destroyed several large shipments of timber imported from Peru based on evidence that the timber had been harvested illegally. Also in 2016, in response to a request under our bilateral trade agreement that Peru verify the legal origin of timber exported to the United States from the Peruvian company Oroza, Peru found that significant portions of that particular timber shipment were not compliant with Peru's law, regulations, and other measures on harvest and trade of timber products. Violations of this type not only lead to environmental harm, they also encourage outsourcing. The United States has decided, as a matter of public policy, to require all businesses operating in this country to comply with certain basic environmental standards. Similarly, it is vital that when U.S. trading partners agree to environmental standards, those standards must be enforced.

d. Trade barriers to U.S. farm exports that were not grounded in science

Finally, when the Trump Administration took office, U.S. farmers faced a variety of trade barriers that were not grounded in science. For example, Argentina had banned U.S. pork, pork products, and beef, while Japan had banned U.S. lamb. Even U.S. trade agreements did not necessarily guarantee full market access to exports by U.S. farmers. For example, NAFTA did not provide full market access for exports of U.S. dairy products into Canada. The Trump Administration has worked with America's trading partners to address such barriers, and has secured market access for U.S. meats in Argentina, Japan, and elsewhere. U.S. dairy products will receive significant new access into the Canadian market under the USMCA, discussed below, which the Administration concluded in 2018 to replace NAFTA.

* * *

In sum, when the Trump Administration took office, globalization was not working as advertised for too many Americans. Between 2000 and 2010, the U.S. manufacturing sector shed over 5.5 million jobs, and recovered only a fraction of this total in the years after the financial crisis. Over the 2000–2016 period, U.S. GDP growth averaged only 1.9 percent per year. Over this period, real median household

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 9

incomes generally declined through 2012, only regaining the income level of 2000 in 2016 and 2017. Meanwhile, China enjoyed surging growth, with average annual GDP growth rate of 9.4 percent from 2000 through 2016. These events led many observers to believe that the future of the global economy belonged to the state-driven economy of China – not the market-based system of the United States. Perhaps most frustrating of all, many of the problems facing Americans were the direct result of unfair, market-distorting practices that rendered markets less efficient.

Some have suggested that the United States could have addressed these difficulties by joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a proposed free trade deal with 11 other countries in North America, South America, and the Pacific Region. President Trump correctly recognized, however, that joining the TPP would have made the situation worse. For example, one major problem for U.S. workers is that the rules of trade encouraged companies to outsource production to countries with weaker labor and environmental rules than the United States. Under the rules of origin contained in the TPP, an automobile with 55 percent of its production in China – and 45 percent of the production in Vietnam – would have entered the U.S. market duty free. TPP provisions on labor, the environment, intellectual property, and currency were all insufficient to address longstanding U.S. concerns. In short, the TPP would have spurred further outsourcing, and put U.S. workers at even more of an unfair disadvantage.

Furthermore, it seems clear that China would have been a major beneficiary from a U.S. entry into TPP. The weak rules of origin in TPP would have encouraged massive outsourcing to China, with just enough production in low-wage TPP countries – such as Vietnam and Malaysia – to satisfy TPP requirements. U.S. workers – or, indeed, workers in almost any country with strong labor and environmental standards – would have found it extremely difficult to compete with such production. As more and more countries moved their production to countries like China, Vietnam, and Malaysia, further loss of U.S. intellectual property and technology would have been inevitable. If anything, it seems likely that over time, even U.S. companies would relocate more of their research and development efforts to be closer to their production facilities.

Some have suggested that the United States could have used the TPP as leverage to force China to adopt market-based reforms. But the example of China's entry into the WTO shows that such hopes have been disappointed in the past. If anything, the increased access to the U.S. market that China would have obtained due to the weak rules of origin in TPP would have given China more leverage – not less – in dealing with U.S. policymakers.

B. The Administration Has Kept Its Promises to Make U.S. Trade Policy Work Better for American Workers

In his 2016 campaign, President Trump argued strenuously that the multilateral trading system was hurting American workers. He called for significant changes in U.S. trade policy. Among other things, he promised to withdraw from the TPP, to renegotiate NAFTA and other flawed U.S. trade deals, and to strictly enforce U.S. trade laws against China and other countries that engage in market-distorting practices. As soon as he took office, President Trump began to turn his promises into reality.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 10

1. Withdrawing from the TPP

Within days of his inauguration, President Trump fulfilled his promise to withdraw the United States from the TPP. Doing so at once avoided wasting further time on a deal that would have hurt U.S. workers. The U.S. withdrawal from the TPP allowed the United States to begin pursuing better and fairer trade relationships with its major trading partners – including other TPP countries.

The United States already has free trade agreements with six TPP countries (Canada, Australia, Mexico, Chile, Peru, and Singapore). As discussed in more detail below, in 2018 the United States significantly renegotiated its trade relationship with Mexico and Canada to conclude the USMCA. President Trump has also indicated a willingness to engage with the other TPP countries (including Japan, Vietnam, Malaysia, and New Zealand), and has already taken steps toward negotiating a bilateral trade agreement with Japan.

2. Obtaining better trade deals

In only two years, the Administration revised and rebalanced existing U.S. trade agreements with three of our major trading partners: Korea, Canada, and Mexico. These revised deals have begun to fulfill President Trump's promise to rebalance U.S. trade relationships to ensure that American businesses and workers share in the benefits of trade.

a. KORUS revisions

As discussed above, the overall benefits to the United States of KORUS fell well short of expectations. In response, the Administration acted quickly to remedy this situation and rebalance the agreement. In July 2017, Ambassador Lighthizer called for a Special Session of the KORUS Joint Committee to initiate the process for modifying and amending KORUS. This process was successful. In September 2018, President Trump and Korean President Moon Jae-In agreed to a revised KORUS – which came into force on January 1, 2019. Concurrent with the Administration's engagement with Korea during 2018 to address our trade imbalance, substantial progress was made to reduce the deficit to achieve more balanced trade.

The revised agreement changes KORUS in a number of ways designed to rebalance KORUS to the advantage of U.S. workers and businesses. For example, Korea has now agreed to double the number of U.S. automobile exports that can enter the Korean market by meeting U.S. safety standards – instead of Korean standards. Korea has also agreed to recognize U.S. standards for auto parts necessary to service U.S. vehicles in Korea. Korea also agreed to the extended phase-out of the 25 percent U.S. tariff on Korean trucks for an additional 20 years. This tariff will now remain in place until 2041 – thus encouraging increased production of pickup trucks in the United States.

In addition, Korea agreed to address long-standing concerns with onerous and costly procedures to verify the origin of exports under KORUS. Many U.S. stakeholders had complained that such procedures were being used in Korea to limit U.S. exports. Moreover, the United States and Korea established a working group to monitor and address future issues that may arise in this regard. Korea also agreed to amend its pharmaceutical reimbursement policy to ensure non-discriminatory and fair treatment for U.S. exports from the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry.

Two key points should be made about the revisions to KORUS. First, while trade negotiations often take years to complete, the revisions to KORUS were completed in a matter of months. U.S. negotiators notified Korea in July 2017 of their intent to address serious issues related to KORUS, and the

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 11

parties announced in March 2018 that they had reached an agreement. By September 2018, the agreement had been signed, and all formal changes were approved in the Korean National Assembly by December 2018. Second, the Trump Administration was quickly able to achieve significant outcomes for U.S. workers and businesses. These facts support President Trump's belief that the size and importance of the U.S. market give this country significant leverage in trade negotiations – and they show how the Administration is using that leverage to obtain better terms for American workers.

b. Replacement of NAFTA with the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)

In 2018, the Administration also fulfilled President Trump's campaign promise to renegotiate NAFTA. As discussed above, in the more than two decades since its entry into force, NAFTA had become outdated and had failed to deliver its expected benefits. On November 30, 2018, the United States, Canada, and Mexico signed the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), which will replace NAFTA, rebalance America's trade relationships with Canada and Mexico, and better serve the interests of American workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses. As with KORUS, these negotiations took place at unprecedented speed – negotiations began in August 2017 and ended in September 2018. The USMCA provides further evidence of the leverage available to the United States in trade negotiations – when we choose to use it.

One of the Administration's top priorities in 2019 is to obtain Congressional approval of the USMCA. The USMCA gives more priority to the interests of American workers than any prior deal signed by the United States. It is not merely a new trade deal – it is a new paradigm for future agreements. The USMCA proves that the United States can obtain better trade agreements that not only promote market-efficient outcomes, but also pay special heed to concerns of American workers. Indeed, the USMCA is the most advanced trade agreement ever negotiated by the United States on key issues like labor, environmental protection, currency, intellectual property, and digital trade. Some of the most critical points about USMCA are summarized below.

i. The USMCA rebalances NAFTA in favor of U.S. workers

As described above, NAFTA has failed to bring about certain promised benefits – or even to create a level playing field for American workers. The USMCA rebalances U.S. trade relations with Canada and Mexico to benefit American workers and businesses and reduce incentives to outsource by providing strong labor protections, robust and innovative rules of origin, and revised investment provisions.

One of President Trump's principal objectives in the renegotiation of NAFTA was to discourage outsourcing by companies seeking to take advantage of unfairly depressed wages and poor labor standards in Mexico. Another was to create a more level playing field for American workers. One major problem with NAFTA is that it has no enforceable labor provisions – only a side agreement that has long been ineffective at addressing the U.S. concerns. By contrast, the USMCA brings labor obligations into the core of the agreement and makes them fully enforceable. In fact, the USMCA includes the strongest, most advanced, and most comprehensive labor provisions of any trade agreement.

In the USMCA, Mexico has – for the first time – committed to specific legislative actions that will require it to overhaul its system of labor justice and that will provide for the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining. The USMCA also requires parties to adopt, maintain, and enforce labor rights as recognized by the International Labor Organization without waiving or derogating from those rights. Additionally, the USMCA includes new commitments from these two trading partners to take

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 12

measures to prohibit the importation of goods produced by forced labor, to address violence against workers exercising their labor rights, and to ensure that migrant workers are protected under labor laws.

In short, the USMCA sends a dramatic signal to our trading partners: the time for using trade deals to take advantage of American workers, or to use unfair labor practices to steal U.S. jobs, is over. The USMCA marks the beginning of a new era in globalization, in which the effects of trade policy on American workers will finally be taken seriously.

The USMCA also includes stricter rules of origin – particularly with respect to automobiles and automotive parts – to ensure that American workers will share the benefits of trade. In developing these rules of origin, the United States proceeded from the fundamental premise that companies should not obtain the benefit of a trade agreement unless they are actively producing goods in the countries that are parties to the agreement. A situation like we saw in TPP – where an automobile mostly produced in a non-party like China could obtain duty-free treatment – is a recipe for outsourcing. The USMCA rejects such an approach. Instead, the USMCA is designed to revitalize the U.S. auto industry by encouraging increased production in this country and the region.

Compared to NAFTA, the USMCA represents a dramatic improvement for U.S. autoworkers. Under NAFTA, an automobile can obtain duty-free treatment so long as 62.5 percent of the automobile is made in the NAFTA region. Furthermore, NAFTA "deems" certain auto parts – such as electronic parts – as being made in the NAFTA region when used in the production of an automobile even if such parts are produced entirely outside the NAFTA region. As a result, automobiles can be sold in the United States with no duties even when less than 62.5 percent of the automobile is made in the United States, Canada, or Mexico. Under the USMCA, however, an automobile will qualify for duty-free treatment only if 75 percent of the content originates in the NAFTA region. Furthermore, the USMCA does not "deem" any part as being made in the North American region – to qualify, a part must actually be made in North America. The USMCA also requires that to qualify for duty-free treatment, an automobile must have certain core parts – parts that are the source of high-wage, high-skilled manufacturing and jobs – produced in the NAFTA region. Taken together, these provisions will create strong new incentives for automakers to invest and manufacture in the United States and North America.

But that's not all. Under NAFTA, the rules of origin are satisfied so long as the relevant production takes place in any of the three NAFTA countries – the United States, Mexico, or Canada. In other words, a car produced solely in Mexico will qualify for duty-free treatment in the United States. Not surprisingly, this rule encourages automakers to base their production in Mexico, where wages – as described above – have been kept artificially low. This situation is not fair to American workers – and under the USMCA, it will change.

To qualify for duty-free treatment under USMCA, at least 40-45 percent of a vehicle's content must be produced by workers in the NAFTA region that earn an average wage of at least $16 per hour. No plants in Mexico are close to fulfilling this requirement, which means that companies seeking to serve the U.S. market will have a strong incentive to increase production in the United States. The new rules of origin in USMCA should result in billions of dollars in new investment related to U.S. production of automobiles and auto parts in the short-term, while providing substantial benefits over the long-term as companies make decisions about where to locate and source parts for the new energy and autonomous vehicles of the future.

These provisions represent a dramatic change in U.S. trade policy. For decades, the United States signed trade deals that often encouraged companies to shift production from this country into other countries with much lower labor costs. Now, we are taking a different approach – an approach designed to ensure

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 13

that American workers have a much better chance of competing on more equal terms for the type of manufacturing jobs that have long been a backbone of our middle class.

ii. The USMCA upgrades key NAFTA obligations

After more than two decades in force, NAFTA was significantly out of date. Any free trade agreement between the United States, Canada, and Mexico should represent the gold standard for deals that promote economic growth, reflect the realities of the 21st century economy, and create conditions for fairer competition between U.S. workers and their North American counterparts. NAFTA has never met this standard. NAFTA lacks provisions governing modern trade issues related to intellectual property, e-commerce, and digital trade. NAFTA also lacks any significant enforceable provisions to discourage unfair labor and environmental practices. As discussed below, the USMCA upgrades NAFTA in these important areas.

First, the USMCA provides strong and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights. Significantly, these provisions go well beyond what Mexico and Canada had agreed to as part of the TPP negotiations and the original NAFTA. For example, the USMCA offers the strongest protections against trade secret misappropriation of any trade agreement, including civil remedies and criminal penalties. For the first time, the USMCA will include strong standards to discourage Canada and Mexico from issuing rules on new geographical indications that would prevent U.S. producers from using common names for food products, and establishes a consultation mechanism for new geographical indications recognized by free trade agreements.

The USMCA also includes robust protection of copyrights, including full national treatment, as well as a minimum term of copyright protection that exceeds the TPP standard but does not change U.S. law. The agreement imposes strong measures against circumvention of technological protection measures that often protect digital music, movies, and books. Finally, the USMCA establishes appropriate copyright safe harbors, which protect intellectual property and provide predictability for legitimate enterprises that do not directly benefit from infringement, consistent with U.S. law. The USMCA also requires parties to implement the most comprehensive enforcement measures of any trade agreement, including enforcement measures with regard to the digital environment.

The United States is extremely competitive in the field of digital trade, and U.S. trade policy should reflect that fact. The USMCA does so by including the strongest rules in support of digital trade that can be found in any trade agreement to date. For example, the USMCA prohibits customs duties and other discriminatory measures from being applied to digital products such as e-books, videos, music, software and games. The USMCA also facilitates cross-border data transfer and minimizes limits on the location of data storage and processing. The USMCA streamlines digital transactions by permitting the use of electronic authentication and electronic signatures, while protecting consumers' and businesses' confidential information and guaranteeing that enforceable consumer protections are applied to the digital marketplace. The USMCA also limits governments' ability to require businesses to disclose proprietary computer source code and algorithms, and supports innovation in digital trade and e-commerce by promoting open access to government-generated public data and limiting civil liability of Internet platforms for third-party content that such platforms host or process, outside of intellectual property enforcement. Together, these provisions will encourage a robust market in digital trade between the United States, Canada, and Mexico – a development that should result in increased prosperity, and good-paying jobs, in all three countries.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 14

Finally, the USMCA includes the most comprehensive set of enforceable environmental obligations of any U.S. agreement. NAFTA has no enforceable provisions regarding environmental protection – only a side agreement that does nothing to discourage outsourcing by companies seeking to avoid U.S. environmental rules. By contrast, the USMCA prohibits harmful fisheries subsidies, including those that benefit vessels or operators involved in illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. The USMCA ensures strong enforcement to combat IUU fishing, and enhances the effectiveness of customs inspections of shipments containing wild fauna and flora at ports of entry to combat trafficking in wildlife, timber, and fish. The USMCA protects marine species such as whales and sea turtles, and prohibits shark-finning. The USMCA also includes the first-ever provision to improve air quality, prevent and reduce marine litter, and support sustainable forest management. In addition, the USMCA envisions continued work on environmental rules. The parties have committed to work together to protect marine habitat and provided robust and modernized mechanisms for public participation and environmental cooperation. This means that for years to come, the nations of North America can set a global standard for balancing economic growth with responsible stewardship of the environment.

iii. The USMCA combats non-market practices

The USMCA also includes a number of ground-breaking provisions to combat subsidies and non-market practices that have the potential to disadvantage U.S. workers and businesses. Many of these provisions – while important in the context of North America in their own right – set important new precedents for future trade negotiations with potential partners outside the region. For example, companies owned or controlled by governments – so-called "state-owned enterprises" – have a number of unfair advantages when it comes to competing against private companies. A state-owned enterprise may receive capital on extremely favorable terms, or may be under less pressure than a private company to deliver a strong rate of return. For these reasons, many U.S. stakeholders have long expressed concern about being forced into situations where they have to compete against a company that is supported by its government.

To address this problem, the USMCA contains new and stronger provisions designed to ensure that state-owned enterprises do not distort markets in the NAFTA region. Specifically, the agreement defines state-owned enterprises broadly, to include not only entities in which the government holds a majority stake, but also entities in which the government owns a minority of the equity but nonetheless is able to exercise control. In addition, the USMCA includes new state-owned enterprise subsidy disciplines that go beyond existing rules and prohibit subsidies that are particularly trade-distorting.

Currency manipulation is another way for countries to give their companies and workers an unfair advantage over their U.S. counterparts. For example, by keeping the value of its currency artificially low, a country can effectively raise the price of imports, while lowering the price of its exports. While this problem has been recognized for many years, it has not been seriously addressed in prior U.S. trade deals. The USMCA changes that, with new policy and transparency commitments on currency issues. Specifically, the USMCA requires high-standard commitments to refrain from competitive devaluations and targeting exchange rates, while significantly increasing transparency and providing mechanisms for accountability. This approach – which is unprecedented in the context of a U.S. trade agreement – will help reinforce macroeconomic and exchange rate stability.

Finally, the USMCA contains provisions designed to protect U.S. interests if Canada or Mexico decides to enter into negotiations for a free trade agreement with China or other non-market economies. One of the primary purposes of the USMCA is to ensure that economic competition takes place on a true market basis. Success in economic competition should reflect hard work and innovation – not unfair government support and other market-distorting practices. Accordingly, the USMCA provides that if any

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 15

party undertakes to negotiate a free trade agreement with China or other non-market economy, that party must notify the others of its intentions. Through the USMCA, the United States is agreeing to provide special trade privileges to Canada and Mexico. If Canada and Mexico then decide to give similar privileges to China, a non-market economy, the United States will be disadvantaged and lose the benefit of the original bargain. If either Canada or Mexico do negotiate a free trade agreement with China, the United States will have the option to end its obligations under the USMCA to that nation, while maintaining its economic ties through the USMCA to the other party. This new provision – which has not been included in any prior U.S. trade deal – provides a dramatic new tool to preserve fair market competition in North America.

iv. The USMCA's term and review provisions will encourage upgrades and improvements in the future

As discussed above, one of the biggest problems with NAFTA is that it is more than 25 years old. NAFTA went into effect before most Americans had ever heard of the Internet. As a result, it lacks any meaningful provisions on key issues like digital trade and emerging issues related to protection of intellectual property. The United States should never be in a position where American workers and companies are hamstrung by an old agreement that is unbalanced or fails to account for modern realities. To prevent this problem in the future, the USMCA takes a new approach to setting the term of the agreement.

In the era of globalization, U.S. trade agreements have been given no definite time frame – once they go into effect, they remain in place unless the parties agree to make a change, or one party withdraws. In other words, unless one party is prepared to threaten to terminate the agreement, it is impossible to compel the other parties to renegotiate. The USMCA, by contrast, is subject to a 16-year term, with the possibility of extensions if agreed to by the parties. The agreement provides that the United States, Canada, and Mexico will review the operation of the USMCA every six years. At the end of these reviews, each party must confirm whether it wishes to extend the USMCA's term for another 16 years. If there is no agreement to extend the USMCA in a particular review, the parties will meet every year until an agreement to extend is reached, or until the term of the agreement expires.

These provisions ensure that the USMCA will not suffer the same fate as NAFTA, which had become unbalanced and outdated long before it was renegotiated. Moreover, the increasing value of the U.S. economy in coming years will provide strong incentives for Mexico and Canada to renegotiate and satisfy U.S. concerns during these regular reviews. In short, the term and review provisions are part of a new paradigm whereby trade deals are monitored more closely, and U.S. policymakers are in a stronger position to advocate for the interests of American workers.

v. The USMCA represents a significant improvement over the TPP

Before President Trump's decision to withdraw, the United States, Mexico, and Canada were all parties to the TPP. The TPP included certain provisions – on topics such as intellectual property and market access – that are similar to provisions in the USMCA. Because of these facts, some have suggested that the USMCA is merely a revision of the TPP. This is not correct. While the USMCA built upon ideas developed in negotiating the TPP, the USMCA represents a much better deal for U.S. workers and the U.S. economy than the TPP would have been. Many of the differences between the USMCA and the TPP have been described above. For example, the USMCA's rules on intellectual property, digital trade, labor, and the environment are significantly stronger and more effective than anything in the TPP. The TPP also has no provision like the one in the USMCA that discourages parties from signing free trade agreements with China. (Indeed, as discussed above, the TPP would likely have benefited China.) The TPP has no review

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 16

mechanism like the one in the USMCA. As explained above, each of these provisions is critical to ensuring that American workers will be treated fairly. All of them are present in the USMCA. None of them was present in the TPP.

There are other ways in which the USMCA improves upon the TPP. As discussed above, the USMCA includes stronger rules of origin that exceed those in both NAFTA and the TPP. The robust rules of origin contained in the USMCA govern the tariff treatment not only of autos and auto parts, but also of other industrial products such as chemicals, steel-intensive products, textiles and apparel, glass, and optical fiber. The USMCA also establishes procedures that streamline certification and verification of rules of origin and that promote strong enforcement of those rules. These USMCA provisions will help prevent duty evasion before it happens, and ensure that only producers using sufficient and significant North American parts and materials receive preferential tariff benefits.

In addition, the USMCA provides U.S. producers with market access in Canada and Mexico that exceeds both NAFTA and the TPP. The USMCA includes new provisions for transparency in import and export licensing procedures. The agreement prohibits parties from requiring the use of local distributors for importation, restricting the importation of commercial goods that contain cryptography, and restricting the importation of used goods. In addition, the USMCA updates provisions for the duty-free temporary admission of goods to cover shipping containers and other substantial holders used in the shipment of goods. The USMCA also includes important improvements that will enable food and agriculture to be traded more fairly, and which will allow for expanded exports of American agricultural products. This includes securing significant new access for U.S. producers to Canada's market for dairy, eggs, and poultry. The new agreement resolves a number of persistent trade irritants with Canada that are of great significance to a number of U.S. businesses, from dairy farmers in Wisconsin and upstate New York, to winemakers in California, Oregon, and Washington state.

Finally, the USMCA includes new provisions governing specific manufacturing sectors, including information and communication technology, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, cosmetic products, and chemical substances. These sectoral annexes include provisions that exceed NAFTA and the TPP by promoting enhanced regulatory compatibility, best regulatory practices, and increased trade among the United States, Canada, and Mexico.

In short, the USMCA represents the beginning of a new era in U.S. trade policy. It not only brings the NAFTA relationship into the 21st century, it contains unprecedented new requirements to ensure that American workers will fully benefit from that relationship. Passage of the USMCA is a win-win outcome for American business – and American workers. We urge Congress to quickly approve the USMCA.

c. Advancing U.S. interests through other negotiations

In addition to pursuing new free trade agreements, the Trump Administration has continued to hold meetings with existing trade partners pursuant to other procedures. For example, USTR has more than fifty Trade and Investment Framework Agreements (TIFAs) with individual countries or regional groupings across the globe. These TIFAs provide opportunities to resolve trade and investment issues at an early stage – including issues related to market access, labor, the environment, and intellectual property rights. TIFAs allow the United States and its partners to pursue topics of mutual interest with the objective of improving cooperation and enhancing opportunities for trade and investment.

The United States has also continued to engage in multilateral trade discussions. For example, the United States remains one of the most active participants in WTO committees that cover topics such as trade remedies, import licensing, standards and technical barriers to trade, and government procurement,

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 17

and is driving much of the work in those committees forward. The United States is committed to ensuring that WTO Members fully implement the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), which came into effect in February 2017. The TFA, once fully implemented, can cut worldwide trade costs by between 12.5 percent and 17.5 percent and will greatly benefit U.S. new-to-export companies and U.S. small businesses. Over the past year, the United States has pursued exploratory work among like-minded WTO Members toward plurilateral negotiations on electronic commerce designed to safeguard and promote digital trade. The United States also works with partners in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) in an effort to advance free, fair, and reciprocal trade and investment in the region while delivering meaningful results for U.S. exporters.

The United States works closely with market-driven economies at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to encourage high-standard trade policies and practices. Through its efforts at the WTO, APEC, the OECD, and other multilateral organizations, the United States seeks to ensure that U.S. businesses and workers can reap their fair share of the benefits of global trade. It is also critical that these organizations are able to keep up with the challenges of the modern economy through meaningful reform. The United States wants to see multilateral institutions that work, but not those that go beyond their mandate and impose on the sovereignty of their members.

3. Aggressive enforcement of U.S. trade laws

Negotiating new and better trade deals is vital to America's future. But President Trump also understands the importance of strong and effective enforcement of U.S. trade laws to prevent other countries from unfairly attacking this market. Over the last two years, the Administration has undertaken aggressive action on this front. Congress has enacted procedures for unfair trade investigations under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, safeguard actions under Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974, and national security investigations of imports under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. In recent decades, these tools were largely unused – even as millions of American manufacturing jobs disappeared, and as countries like China used unfair practices to hurt U.S. companies. But under President Trump's leadership, the Administration is using all available tools to create a fairer and stronger economy for American workers.

a. Investigation of China's intellectual property practices

A significant part of USTR's aggressive enforcement of U.S. trade laws has been its investigation into China's treatment of U.S. intellectual property under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974. During the 2016 campaign, President Trump promised that he would use Section 301 to address unfair trade – and he has kept that promise. As discussed below, this investigation was initiated in August 2017, and in 2018 – after China refused to address the conduct at issue in this investigation – the United States imposed three rounds of tariffs on Chinese imports to the United States. The United States also engaged with other trading partners who share similar concerns with China's treatment of intellectual property. These actions are discussed in more detail below.

i. Purpose and history of Section 301

Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended, is a key enforcement tool designed to address a wide variety of unfair acts, policies, and practices of U.S. trading partners. Under Section 301 procedures, three categories of acts, policies, or practices of a foreign country are potentially actionable: (1) trade

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 18

agreement violations; (2) acts, policies, or practices that are unjustifiable (defined as those that are inconsistent with U.S. international legal rights) and that burden or restrict U.S. commerce; and (3) acts, policies, or practices that are unreasonable or discriminatory and that burden or restrict U.S. commerce. If a foreign country's acts, policies, or practices are determined to be actionable under Section 301, the United States may suspend or withdraw trade benefits to that country, impose duties or other restrictions on that country's imports, make binding agreements that commit the foreign country to eliminate the offending conduct or provide compensatory trade benefits, or restrict or deny the issuance of service sector authorizations to nationals of that country.

Section 301 investigations may be initiated through petitions by interested persons or self-initiated by USTR. From 1975 through the early 1990s, Section 301 procedures were regularly used by Administrations of both parties to investigate a variety of actions, ranging from China's tariff on major home appliances to the European Communities' export subsidies on sugar. When the United States joined the WTO, the Statement of Administrative Action that accompanied the Uruguay Round Agreements Act made clear that the authority of Section 301 was still available to address unfair practices not covered by trade agreements. Instead of using this authority, however, the United States largely remained passive in the face of new market-distorting practices that put Americans at an unfair disadvantage. In 2017, however, President Trump changed U.S. policy in this regard – under his leadership, USTR undertook a major investigation under Section 301 into China's unfair practices with respect to U.S. intellectual property.

ii. USTR's investigation into China's treatment of U.S. intellectual property

USTR initiated an investigation into China's treatment of U.S. intellectual property on August 18, 2017. On the same day, USTR requested consultations with the Government of China concerning the issues under investigation. USTR also provided public notice of its investigation, and solicited written comments and oral testimony from interested persons.

USTR's Section 301 investigation was led by career professionals, and gave all interested parties the opportunity to be heard. On October 10, 2017, USTR held a hearing on the issues in the Section 301 investigation. After considering the testimony at this hearing, as well as extensive written comments from a wide array of interested parties, USTR issued a report of its findings in the investigation on March 22, 2018. Based on the evidence in its report, USTR determined that China had adopted actionable policies and practices (1) requiring or pressuring U.S. companies to transfer technology to Chinese entities through joint venture requirements and other foreign ownership restrictions, administrative reviews, and licensing

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 19

procedures, (2) using its technology regulations to force U.S. companies to license their technologies on non-market terms that favor Chinese recipients, (3) generating technology transfer from U.S. companies by directing or facilitating systematic investment in, and acquisition of, these U.S. companies and assets, and (4) stealing sensitive commercial information and trade secrets of American companies through unauthorized intrusions into their computer networks.

Based on these findings, the United States initiated a WTO dispute with respect to the one practice that could be addressed under WTO rules, namely, China's measures pertaining to the licensing of intellectual property rights, on March 23, 2018. The United States continued to pursue the other practices covered by the Section 301 investigation on a bilateral basis.

iii. U.S. efforts to negotiate with China and the imposition of tariffs

As noted, the United States requested consultations with China on August 18, 2017, the same day that the Section 301 investigation was initiated. Instead of accepting this request for consultations, however, China's Ministry of Commerce expressed "strong dissatisfaction" with the United States and decried the investigation as "irresponsible" and "not objective."

Nevertheless, the Administration continued to engage with China on Section 301 issues. On May 4, 2018, a cabinet-level U.S. delegation traveled to Beijing to discuss bilateral economic issues, including China's policies addressed in the Section 301 report of March 22, 2018. Less than two weeks later, senior Administration officials hosted a trade delegation from China in Washington, D.C. on May 17, 2018. On June 2 and 3, 2018, another high-level U.S. delegation met with its Chinese counterparts in Beijing for additional discussions.

Each of these meetings gave China an opportunity to address U.S. concerns. Throughout these meetings, U.S. officials provided China with detailed evidence of the problems created by China's unfair practices. They also discussed specific reforms to improve our trading relationship. Unfortunately, however, China failed to respond in a productive manner. Faced with this intransigence, the United States proceeded to take steps to impose tariffs as permitted under Section 301. Specifically, on July 6, 2018 and August 23, 2018, USTR imposed tariffs on approximately $50 billion of Chinese imports as part of the U.S.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 20

response to China's unfair trade practices with respect to U.S. intellectual property. Before imposing these tariffs, USTR provided public notice of the specific tariff lines that would be affected, and solicited public comment on issues such as whether the imposition of tariffs on particular products would cause disproportionate economic harm to U.S. interests.

After these tariffs were imposed, however, China made clear – both in public statements and in government-to-government communications – that it would not change the unfair policies identified in USTR's Section 301 investigation. Indeed, China denied there were problems with respect to its policies involving technology transfer and intellectual property. In fact, China responded to the U.S. action by increasing duties on certain U.S. exports to China – an obvious attempt to cause further harm to the U.S. economy.

These actions demonstrated that USTR's initial tariff action was no longer appropriate to obtain the elimination of China's unfair trade acts, policies, and practices. In addition, the burden or restriction on United States commerce of these acts, policies, and practices continued to increase. Thus, in accordance with direction from the President, on September 24, 2018, USTR imposed additional tariffs on approximately $200 billion of imports from China. These tariffs were initially set at 10 percent, and were scheduled to increase to 25 percent on January 1, 2019.

iv. Working with allies to address mutual concerns

In seeking to persuade China to change its behavior, the Administration reached out to other countries that also are adversely affected by China's unfair trading practices. The United States has worked closely with leaders from the EU and Japan, who share many of the concerns expressed by the United States regarding China's actions. At the conclusion of trilateral meetings held in May 2018, trade ministers of the United States, Japan, and the EU "confirmed" their "shared view" that no country should require or pressure technology transfer from foreign companies to domestic companies." The statement specifically observed

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 21

that such transfers could occur through the use of joint venture requirements, foreign equity limitations, administrative review and licensing processes, or other means.

At the conclusion of follow-up trilateral meetings in September 2018, U.S., Japanese, and EU trade ministers issued a statement recalling their shared view that no country should require or pressure technology transfer from foreign companies. The Ministers called these practices "deplorable" and affirmed that they would use "effective means" to halt forced technology transfer and would further discuss enforcement and rule-making as tools to address this problem. Following further trilateral meetings in January 2019, the Ministers again confirmed their agreement to cooperate in the area of forced technology transfers.

v. Recent progress in negotiations

Facing an imminent increase in tariff rates, President Xi of China met with President Trump at the G-20 meeting in Buenos Aires on November 30, 2018. President Trump and President Xi agreed to immediately begin negotiations on structural changes with respect to forced technology transfer, intellectual property protection, non-tariff barriers, cyber intrusions and cyber theft, services and agriculture. Both parties agreed that they would endeavor to have this transaction completed within the next 90 days. To give both countries more time to resolve their differences, President Trump agreed to leave tariffs at 10 percent for $200 billion worth of Chinese imports to the United States until March 2, 2019.

At that meeting, China also agreed to purchase a substantial amount of agricultural, energy, industrial, and other products from the United States to reduce the trade imbalance between the two countries. China also agreed to start purchasing agricultural product from American farmers immediately.

Following the meeting in Buenos Aires, talks between the United States and China have proceeded at a rapid pace and at a very high level of engagement. Negotiators from the United States and China have met on four separate occasions: in Beijing from January 7-9, 2019; in Washington, D.C. from January 30-31; in Beijing again from February 11-15; and in Washington, D.C. again from February 19-24. In addition, China has agreed to suspend additional 25 percent tariffs it had imposed on U.S. autos in July 2018.

At the conclusion of the last meeting in Washington, D.C., President Trump announced that the parties had made substantial progress on important structural issues and, therefore, the tariff increase on certain Chinese imports that had been scheduled for March 2 is being delayed while talks continue. If both sides make additional progress, President Trump also announced that he and President Xi of China will meet to conclude the agreement between the United States and China.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 22

USTR will remain vigilant in monitoring developments to ensure that China's actions are consistent with its international obligations and the commitments it has made to the United States in connection with the Section 301 investigation.

b. Safeguard measures against imported washing machines and solar panels

During the 2016 campaign, President Trump promised to strictly enforce Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 – which provides for "safeguard" relief under certain circumstances. Again, President Trump has kept his promise. Modern U.S. trade agreements, including the WTO Agreement, rest on the expectation that reducing barriers to trade will increase opportunities for U.S. exporters and decrease costs to consumers. But they have also recognized that sometimes these expectations are not fulfilled, and that domestic industries facing increased imports will come under unusual competitive stress. To address these possibilities, U.S. trade agreements regularly include "escape clauses" or "safeguard" provisions that allow the United States to impose temporary trade restrictions when increased imports of a product harm domestic producers of that product.

In 2017, the Administration applied such a mechanism – found in Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974 – to protect U.S. producers of solar panels and washing machines. Section 201 procedures permit domestic producers to request the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) to conduct an investigation of increased imports and their effects on the U.S. market. If the ITC finds that imports have increased such that they are a substantial cause of serious injury, or the threat thereof, to a domestic industry producing an article like or directly competitive with the imported articles, the President shall take all appropriate and feasible action within his authority he considers necessary to facilitate efforts by the domestic industry to make a positive adjustment to import competition, as long as the economic and social benefits of such action are greater than the costs.

Before President Trump took office, the United States had last used Section 201 in 2002, when President Bush imposed temporary tariff increases on a number of steel products. Domestic steel producers used the relief to restructure their operations, emerging from the process stronger and more competitive than before. Nevertheless, Section 201 had remained unused for over a decade, even as numerous industries were harmed by import surges.

In May and June 2017, U.S. producers filed petitions with the ITC – an independent agency of the U.S. government – requesting investigations of imports of solar cells and modules, and of large residential washing machines. The ITC conducted thorough investigations and determined in both cases that increased imports were a substantial cause of serious injury to U.S. producers. Specifically, in the washing machines action, the ITC's investigation revealed that the volume of imported washing machines nearly doubled from 2012 to 2016. The ITC also found that foreign producers had engaged in significant underselling and aggressive pricing, which forced U.S. producers to reduce prices to defend their market share. The ITC's investigation of solar panels revealed that from 2012 to 2016, U.S. imports of the products at issue grew by nearly 500 percent. The ITC found that as a result of this surge of imports, many American producers of solar panels ceased production entirely or moved their operations abroad, while those that remained in operation in the U.S. faced consistently negative financial performance that forced them to reduce capital

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 23

investment and R&D expenditures. In both cases, the ITC recommended that the President impose temporary tariffs in order to give domestic producers an opportunity to recover from the harm caused by imports.

In response, President Trump used his authority under Section 201 to increase tariffs on solar cells and modules, as well as imported washing machines. In so doing, President Trump acted in a manner consistent with the ITC's findings, which were based in turn on its extensive analysis of the underlying facts. With his actions, President Trump showed the world that Section 201 is not a dead letter, and that relief would be available when justified by the facts. This type of enforcement is critical to avoid harmful import surges like the ones at issue in these actions.

c. National security investigations of imports

President Trump has also taken steps to protect U.S. national security under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. This statute permits the Department of Commerce, in consultation with the Department of Defense, to investigate the effect of imports on the national security of the United States. The President imposed tariffs on imports of steel and aluminum in 2018 pursuant to Section 232 investigations, and the Department of Commerce has launched investigations into the national security effects of automobile imports and uranium imports.

As explained above, market-distorting practices in China and other countries resulted in massive volumes of excess capacity in both the steel and aluminum industries. Because of this excess capacity, U.S. producers of steel and aluminum found it impossible to obtain a true, market-based price for their products. The result was a pair of crises in these two vital industries. For years before President Trump took office, the U.S. government had alerted other countries to the problems facing U.S. and other market-based steel and aluminum producers. The United States also had tried to work with the OECD Steel Committee. The OECD recognized the "serious problems" of overcapacity in 2016. And, at the urging of the United States, launched a Global Forum on Steel Excess Capacity. All of these efforts were designed to find a solution to the ongoing problems resulting from global excess capacity.

Unfortunately, these efforts were not successful. China and the other countries responsible for the world's excess capacity were simply unwilling to take any practical steps that would make a significant difference for U.S. producers. Under these circumstances, the Trump Administration faced a stark choice: take unilateral action, or risk permanent long-term damage to steel and aluminum production in the United States.

Losing even more of the nation's steel and aluminum production raised serious concerns about U.S. national security. The Department of Commerce conducted a detailed investigation pursuant to Section 232, and concluded that: (1) the U.S. steel and aluminum industries were being harmed by imports and

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 24

global excess capacity, and (2) import restrictions were justified to address the national security concerns associated with such harm. In response to this report, President Trump imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum – tariffs that have been extremely effective in preventing further harm to domestic producers. The Administration negotiated country-wide exemptions to the tariffs for those countries that agreed to satisfactory alternative means to address the threatened impairment to U.S. national security of steel and aluminum imports from their countries.

The Administration has also launched an investigation into the national security effects of automobiles and automotive parts. In February 2019, Secretary Ross provided his Section 232 report on automobile and automotive parts imports to President Trump.

d. Robust enforcement of U.S. trade rights

The Administration has also continued its robust enforcement of U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty (AD/CVD) laws. In 2018, the Department of Commerce issued 54 new AD/CVD orders, including 19 that concern products from China and 25 that concern steel or steel-related products from various countries. These orders concern a wide range of imported products, including plywood, aluminum foil, mechanical tubing, ripe olives, biodiesel, and others.

The Administration continues to defend U.S. enforcement of domestic trade remedies actions and other measures against WTO challenges. Over the last ten years, U.S. actions have been challenged over fifty times at the WTO. About half of those challenges were against U.S. trade remedies actions. Increasingly, foreign governments are not content to challenge the application of U.S. trade laws in particular cases – they seek to weaken the laws themselves. For example, in 2016, China challenged the United States' use of non-market economy methodology in U.S. antidumping proceedings involving products from China. China and other countries have challenged other aspects of U.S. AD/CVD laws, including whether subsidies found to be specific under U.S. law are sufficiently specific to comply with WTO rules and whether WTO rules permit practices permitted under U.S. trade laws, such as the use of adverse facts available when non-cooperating respondents fail to provide requested necessary information, zeroing, and differential pricing analysis.

In such cases, USTR's primary objective is defending the ability of the U.S. Department of Commerce to apply appropriate antidumping and countervailing duties to combat market-distorting practices that hurt U.S. farmers, workers, and industries. If U.S. trade laws are weakened, we will see more attacks on the U.S. market by foreign producers who sell products at dumped and subsidized prices. Domestic enforcement of U.S. trade remedies laws is critical to ensuring that trade is fair – and that American workers can compete on a level playing field with workers in other countries. Undermining those laws not only distorts markets, it also undermines support for free trade. USTR, therefore, will continue its aggressive efforts to defend U.S. trade laws from unwarranted challenges at the WTO and elsewhere.

In 2018, USTR has also been actively engaged in numerous dispute settlement actions outside the AD/CVD context, including important offensive actions related to technology transfer policies, export subsidies, and agricultural market access, and defensive actions related to the Trump Administration's actions under Section 232. For example, the United States recently won a WTO dispute against China finding that China provides excessive government support to its grain producers. This finding is a significant victory for U.S. agriculture that will help American farmers compete on a more level playing

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 25

field. In fact, the United States is the most active single litigant at the WTO. As of today, USTR is pursuing 18 offensive disputes at the WTO, is defending the United States in 32 disputes, and is a third party in another 20 disputes. USTR has also directly engaged with trading partners to address trade concerns. For example, in response to mounting evidence of illegal timber harvesting in Peru, the Trump Administration took unprecedented action to ban imports of timber from the Peruvian company Oroza for three years or until Peru could provide evidence that the company is in fact complying with all relevant Peruvian laws and regulations.

4. Ensuring appropriate application of trade preference programs

The Trump Administration has also continued to ensure appropriate application of U.S. trade preference programs, including the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). The GSP, established by the Trade Act of 1974, eliminates duties on thousands of products when those products are imported from designated beneficiary countries and territories – if such beneficiaries meet 15 statutory eligibility criteria. These criteria include, among others, affording internationally recognized worker rights, providing adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights, and assuring the United States that the beneficiary will provide equitable and reasonable access to its market.

In 2018, USTR implemented a new assessment process to ensure that beneficiary countries meet all GSP criteria. The first set of assessments focused on beneficiary countries in Asia and the Pacific Islands. As a result of this process, as well as petitions from U.S. stakeholders, USTR launched new GSP eligibility reviews of India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Thailand, and Turkey. The purpose of these reviews is to determine whether the subject countries are truly satisfying the statutory criteria to receive the benefits of GSP treatment.

USTR has also vigorously engaged with countries subject to GSP eligibility reviews launched in previous years. These efforts led to concrete improvements in worker rights in Bolivia, Iraq, and Uzbekistan. It also led to improved protection of intellectual property rights in Ukraine and Uzbekistan.

To build on these efforts, in 2019 USTR will conduct a similar assessment process with GSP-eligible countries in Europe and the Western Hemisphere. USTR will continue to hold countries that are not meeting the GSP criteria to account, and will ensure that all countries receiving benefits under the GSP program live up to the statutory eligibility criteria.

In 2018, USTR continued to uphold trade preference program eligibility under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). The AGOA annual review conducted in 2018 resulted in the termination of Mauritania's AGOA eligibility, effective January 1, 2019. The President determined that Mauritania is making insufficient progress toward combating forced labor, in particular the scourge of hereditary slavery.

5. Defending U.S. interests at the WTO

Following through on President Trump's promise to put America first, the Administration has also stood up to efforts by some at the WTO to infringe on national sovereignty. Throughout 2018, USTR representatives repeatedly made clear that the dispute settlement process at the WTO has strayed far from the system agreed to by WTO Members, and has appropriated to itself powers that WTO Members never intended to give it. These concerns were discussed in detail in last year's version of this Agenda, and there

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 26

is no need to repeat that discussion here in full. The key point is that the WTO Appellate Body has repeatedly sought to create new obligations not covered in the WTO agreements. As made clear in the Statement of Administrative Action to the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the United States is a sovereign country, and U.S. officials are responsible to the American people for their trade policy. The United States cannot be held responsible for obligations to which its elected officials never agreed. Thus, efforts by the Appellate Body to create new obligations are not legitimate.

These concerns are not new. For many years, and in multiple Administrations, the United States has repeatedly expressed concerns with the WTO Appellate Body's activist approach and overreaching on procedural issues, interpretative approach, and substantive interpretations. This approach fails to apply the WTO rules as written and agreed to by the United States and other WTO Members.

The United States has also provided essential leadership with respect to other critical aspects of reform of the WTO. The Administration has led efforts to improve performance related to notification and transparency obligations under WTO Agreements; we have provided concrete proposals to address the fundamental problems related to self-designation of developing country status; and we are contributing on a daily basis to the improved functioning of the regular committees where much of the WTO's work is accomplished.

Meanwhile, the WTO is not well equipped to handle the fundamental challenge posed by a non-market economy like China. China has no fear of WTO dispute settlement, even as it continues to embrace a state-led, mercantilist approach to the economy and trade that is fundamentally incompatible with the open, market-based approach expressly envisioned and followed by other WTO Members. As the United States has repeatedly made clear at the WTO, China pursues an array of non-market industrial policies and other unfair competitive practices aimed at promoting and supporting its domestic industries. At the same time, China creates unfair disadvantages for foreign companies and their goods and services. These actions have caused serious harm to the United States and many other WTO Members and their companies and workers. Unfortunately, however, many of China's unfair practices – including most of the practices described in USTR's Section 301 report – are not covered by WTO rules.

While the WTO dispute settlement process is of only limited value in dealing with China's non-market practices, the Chinese government is eager to draw upon the judicial activists at the WTO to protect its economic system. Indeed, China plainly seeks to exploit the WTO dispute settlement process to discourage U.S. policymakers from using their leverage to push for market-opening changes. For example, China launched a WTO case against the United States alleging that the U.S. Section 301 investigation violates the WTO agreements. In other words, China seeks to use the WTO dispute settlement system to shield a broad range of trade-distorting policies and practices not covered by WTO rules.

Meanwhile, China has also imposed retaliatory tariffs on U.S. goods with an annual trade value of approximately $100 billion – more than half of all U.S. exports to China – without claiming any WTO justification for these retaliatory tariffs. China's invocation of WTO dispute settlement based on the same actions for which it has already imposed retaliatory measures is a clear attempt by China to exploit WTO dispute settlement to continue the type of unfair practices identified in USTR's Section 301 investigation.

In fact, China has pushed for changes that would make the WTO even more unaccountable to WTO Members. For example, the United States has voiced concern that the WTO Appellate Body has strayed from the role agreed to it by WTO Members by exceeding the 90-day deadline for appeals, reviewing panel

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 27

findings on domestic law (findings of fact), or issuing advisory opinions on issues not necessary to the resolution of a dispute. In response to U.S. concerns, China and other WTO Members have put forth proposals that endorse changing the rules of WTO dispute settlement to accommodate and authorize the very WTO Appellate Body actions that the United States has protested. Such proposals would not return WTO dispute settlement to what was originally agreed to by WTO Members, and instead would permit China flexibility to circumvent WTO rules. It is very troubling to see that China believes that giving more authority to the Appellate Body would be in China's interest.

The United States remains committed to fulfilling its obligations under WTO agreements. Under the leadership of President Trump, however, the United States will certainly reject efforts by the WTO Appellate Body to create new obligations to which WTO Members have not agreed. As shown throughout this document, President Trump inherited a trading system that was deeply flawed, and was generating harmful outcomes for American workers in many instances. The United States government must have the policy space necessary to address the extensive problems discussed in this agenda. That policy space must include the ability to use tariffs or other forms of leverage to persuade other countries to take our concerns seriously.

The current healthy state of the U.S. economy – and the recent boom in employment, including manufacturing employment – shows that the U.S. government can and should adjust trade policy as necessary to avoid the type of challenges inherited by this Administration. Trade policy, like tax policy, must reflect the wishes, concerns, and priorities of the American people – and should not be dictated by technocrats who are not responsible to Americans. The United States remains an independent nation, and our trade policy will be made here – not in Geneva. We will not allow the WTO Appellate Body and dispute settlement system to force the United States into a straitjacket of obligations to which we never agreed.

C. The Administration Will Continue Rebalancing America's Trade Relationships

As shown above, the Trump Administration has already taken major steps to implement a trade policy that is more favorable to American workers. We have significantly re-written major trade deals with Korea, Mexico, and Canada. We have undertaken dramatic new enforcement efforts to stop unfair trading practices in China and other countries. These actions have contributed to a stronger U.S. economy, which has generated increased trade, more jobs, and higher wages for all Americans.

But our work is not yet finished. In 2019, the Trump Administration will continue trying to rebalance U.S. trade relationships for the benefit of American workers and businesses. We have already discussed Congressional approval and subsequent implementation of the USMCA, which will be one of our top priorities. We have also addressed the ongoing negotiations with China, which are another major priority. Other key priorities are discussed in more detail below.

1. Supporting national security

In last year's trade agenda, we stated that "{f}or the Trump Administration, trade policy is intended to advance our national interest. Thus, our trade policy should be consistent with, and supportive of, our national security strategy." This statement remains central to our thinking. As shown throughout this Agenda, we have been focused on efforts to strengthen the U.S. economy, and thereby help to generate the resources necessary to preserve our national security. We have also concentrated on efforts to preserve the innovation and technology that remain vital not only to our economy, but also to our national defense. In

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 28

our efforts to renegotiate NAFTA, in our enforcement actions against China, and in our discussions with other trading partners, we have consistently emphasized the importance of encouraging U.S. innovation.

Another element of supporting national security includes protecting the ability of the American people to govern themselves. As discussed above, in our democratic system of government, it is vital that "We the People" maintain the ability to change our trade policy as necessary to protect our national interest.

As the United States has made clear on numerous occasions, the United States and other WTO Members each have the right to determine, for itself, what it considers in its own essential national security interests. This has been the understanding of the United States for over 70 years, since the negotiation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). That understanding has been shared by every WTO Member whose national security action was the subject of complaint. Despite this understanding, multiple Members are urging the WTO to overrule the United States' determinations concerning its own essential national security interests regarding trade in steel and aluminum under Section 232. Such a decision by the WTO to second guess U.S. national security determinations would threaten serious damage to the multilateral trading system. The United States intends to fight vigorously these efforts to impinge its national sovereignty.

2. Pursuing new trade deals with strategic partners

On October 16, 2018, the U.S. Trade Representative notified Congress, consistent with Trade Promotion Authority procedures, that the Trump Administration intends to negotiate separate trade agreements with Japan, the European Union, and the United Kingdom. As a part of the process of forming its negotiating objectives for these agreements, USTR also solicited public comments and held three public hearings.

In negotiations with Japan, the United States seeks a trade agreement that will address both tariff and non-tariff barriers and achieve fairer, more balanced trade in a manner consistent with congressional objectives. The United States and Japan are the world's first and third largest national economies, respectively, representing about 30 percent of global gross domestic product. Although Japan is an important export market for U.S. producers – receiving some $67.6 billion in U.S. goods exports in 2017 (including $12 billion in agricultural exports) – sectors such as automobiles, agriculture, and services face challenges in exporting to Japan due to multiple tariff and non-tariff barriers. Such barriers have exacerbated chronic U.S. trade imbalances with Japan, as the U.S. trade deficit in goods with Japan was $68.9 billion in 2017, virtually unchanged from 2016. Several key competitors have also recently concluded free trade agreements with Japan and now have a strong and growing price advantage over U.S. exporters. Through a trade agreement, the United States and Japan seek to expand trade and investment between them, and promote a strong, stable, and mutually beneficial trade and economic relationship.

In a free trade agreement with the EU, the United States seeks to support higher-paying jobs in the United States and to grow the U.S. economy by improving U.S. opportunities for trade and investment with

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 29

the EU. The economic relationship between the United States and the EU is the largest and most complex in the world, with $1.3 trillion in annual two-way trade. Despite this significant trade volume, U.S. exporters in key sectors have been challenged by multiple tariff and non-tariff barriers for decades, leading to chronic U.S. trade imbalances with the EU. For example, in 2017, the U.S. trade deficit in goods with the EU was $151.4 billion. As indicated in the joint statement issued by President Trump and European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker following their July 25, 2018 meeting, the United States and the EU would like to pursue negotiations to strengthen their trade relationship to the benefit of all American and European citizens.

In a free trade agreement with the UK, the United States will likewise seek the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers, and aim to achieve a fairer and deeper trade relationship. The United States and the United Kingdom have already signed a bilateral agreement on prudential measures regarding insurance and reinsurance, continuity agreements on wine and distilled spirits, and mutual recognition agreements in certain sectors, all of which are important steps in providing regulatory certainty and market continuity as the UK prepares to leave the EU.

The Trump Administration continues to engage with other countries regarding efforts to deepen trade relationships, promote fair, balanced trade, and support American jobs and prosperity. For example, in August 2018, the United States and Kenya established a trade and investment working group to explore ways to deepen trade and investment between the two countries. At present, trade between the two countries stands at about $1 billion per year, and over 70 percent of Kenya's exports to the United States enter under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). The Administration's engagement with African countries is intended to support comprehensive trade policies and begin to lay the groundwork for a stronger future trade relationship.

3. Continued enforcement of U.S. laws and trading rights

In 2019, the Trump Administration will continue aggressively enforcing U.S. trade laws to protect the interests of American businesses and workers. This trade enforcement will include not only monitoring of trade agreements, but also direct engagement with trading partners and engagement in multilateral fora such as WTO committees. USTR will also continue to promote U.S. interests under U.S. bilateral free trade agreements through means such as work programs and accelerated tariff reductions. USTR's technical assistance to trading partners will also continue in 2019, especially assistance provided to developing country partners, to ensure that key agreements are fully implemented on schedule.

As necessary, USTR will also pursue formal challenges to acts, policies, or practices of foreign governments that are inconsistent with WTO rules under the dispute settlement procedures of the WTO, and will vigorously defend U.S. actions when challenged by foreign governments. Where appropriate, USTR may take action under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 or recommend action under other statutory authorities granted to the President, as appropriate.

I. THE PRESIDENT'S 2019 TRADE POLICY AGENDA | 30

4. Rebalancing the global economy

In 2019, the Trump Administration will continue pressing our trading partners to recognize the need to balance the global economy. A principle problem facing the global trading system is that certain countries persistently run a current account deficit (meaning that they import more goods and services than they export), while other countries persistently run a current account surplus (meaning that they export more goods than they import).

For the past decade, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Brazil, and Mexico, among others, have persistently run current account deficits. Meanwhile, countries including Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway, The Netherlands, Japan, China, Korea, and Russia have consistently run current account surpluses over the past ten years. These persistent trends – which have led to tensions and instabilities throughout the world – demonstrate the significant imbalance in global trade that was in existence when President Trump took office.

President Trump is working to achieve a more balanced economy, which leads to more sustainable economic growth, as well as more production and jobs here in America. The Administration has already taken significant steps to create a more balanced and sustainable trading system, including by withdrawing from the TPP, revising NAFTA and KORUS, and ramping up enforcement of U.S. trade remedies laws. Changes to U.S. tax and regulatory policy are designed to both make the U.S. economy more competitive and increase production in the United States. So far, the United States has seen improvements in production, employment, exports, and wages.

The global economy remains imbalanced however, and the U.S. current account deficit has been highly persistent over the last few years. Accordingly, in 2019, the United States will continue pressing our trading partners for policy changes that will address this imbalance and lead to a more balanced economy here and abroad. The United States looks forward to working with our trading partners to address these and other issues in the coming years.

CONCLUSION

In 2018, the Trump Administration took significant steps to rebalance U.S. trade so that American businesses and workers would share in the benefits of our trade relationships. To this end, the Administration engaged with strategic trade partners to renegotiate existing agreements and to begin negotiating new agreements. The Administration also continued to enforce U.S. trade rights in both domestic and international fora, and stood up for America's interests under existing trade agreements. In 2019, we will continue these efforts, as we take further steps to rebalance America's trade relationships and the global economy.