EU and US take stock of trade and technology cooperation

Today, the European Union and the United States held the fifth meeting of the EU-US Trade and Technology Council (TTC) in Washington, D.C. The meeting allowed ministers to take stock of the progress of the TTC's work and to provide political steer on key priorities for the next TTC Ministerial meeting, which will take place in Belgium in spring.

The TTC is the main forum for close cooperation on transatlantic trade and technology issues. It was co-chaired by European Commission Executive Vice-President Margrethe Vestager, European Commission Executive Vice-President Valdis Dombrovskis, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken, US Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo, and US Trade Representative Katherine Tai, joined by European Commissioner Thierry Breton.

Participants showed a strong, shared desire to continue to increase bilateral trade and investment, co-operate on economic security and emerging technologies and to advance joint interests in the digital environment. In the margins of this TTC meeting, both sides agreed to continue to explore ways to facilitate trade in goods and technologies that are vital for the green transition, including by strengthening the cooperation on conformity assessment. The EU and the US have also committed to make tangible progress on digital trade tools to reduce the red tape for companies across the Atlantic and to strengthen our approaches to investment screening, export controls, outbound investment, and dual-use innovation.

Following their commitment at the last TTC Ministerial, the EU and the US welcomed the International Guiding Principles on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and the voluntary Code of Conduct for AI developers adopted in the G7 and agreed to continue cooperating on international AI governance. Both parties also welcomed the industry roadmap on 6G which sets out guiding principles and next steps to develop this critical technology. They also took stock of progress in supporting secure connectivity around the globe, notably for 5G networks and undersea cables.

The EU and the US are also intensifying their coordination on the availability of critical raw materials crucial for semiconductor production, having activated the joint TTC early warning mechanism for semiconductor supply chain disruptions, following China's announced controls on gallium and germanium. They continued to exchange information on public support for the investments taking place under the respective EU and US Chips Acts. A roundtable on the semiconductor supply chain took place in the margins of the TTC, focusing on developments and potential cooperation in the legacy semiconductor supply chains. Finally, the EU and the US discussed a report mapping EU and US approaches to digital identity, currently open for comments.

At a stakeholder meeting on Crafting the Transatlantic Green Marketplace, which takes place on 31 January, stakeholders will present their views and proposals on how to make transatlantic supply chains stronger, more sustainable and more resilient. A series of workshops will take place to boost the transatlantic green marketplace and to promote good quality jobs for the green transition, as well as workshops on the solar supply chain, permanent magnets and investment screening.

Both sides agreed that the next TTC Ministerial meeting will take place in spring in Belgium, hosted by the Belgian Presidency of the Council.

Background
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and US President Joe Biden launched the EU-US TTC at the EU-US Summit in Brussels in June 2021. The TTC serves as a forum for the EU and the US to discuss and coordinate on key trade and technology issues, and to deepen transatlantic cooperation on issues of joint interest.

The inaugural meeting of the TTC took place in Pittsburgh on 29 September 2021. Following this meeting, 10 working groups were set up covering issues such as technology standards, artificial intelligence, semiconductors, export controls and global trade challenges. This was followed by a second summit in Paris on 16 May 2022, a third summit in College Park, Maryland, in December 2022, and a fourth in Luleå, Sweden in May 2023.

The EU and the US remain key geopolitical and trading partners. EU-US bilateral trade has reached historic levels, with over €1.5 trillion in 2022, including over €100 billion of digital trade.

Readout of U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council Fifth Ministerial Meeting
On Tuesday, January 30, 2024, the U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC) held its fifth ministerial meeting in Washington, D.C.  Secretary of State Antony Blinken, Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo, U.S. Trade Representative Katherine Tai, and senior National Security Council Staff were joined by EU TTC co-chairs European Commission Executive Vice Presidents Margrethe Vestager and Valdis Dombrovskis.  European Commissioner for Internal Market Thierry Breton also joined the discussions.

Building on the progress from the May 2023 TTC ministerial meeting in Lulea, Sweden, the U.S. co-chairs stressed the importance of fortifying our collective economic security, including by further de-risking and diversifying of our economies, building resilient supply chains, employing outbound investment mechanisms to safeguard national security-related technologies, enhancing and better coordinating our export control regimes to prevent the exploitation of dual-use technologies, and jointly countering the use of economic coercion and non-market policies and practices by authoritarian actors. They also discussed expanding collaboration to counter the misuse of technology, including countering foreign information manipulation and interference (FIMI) and attacks against human rights defenders online while safeguarding freedom of expression. 

The U.S. co-chairs also discussed the importance of expanding transatlantic cooperation in critical and emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI), and jointly promoting innovation, security, and trustworthiness across digital ecosystems, including for maintenance and repair of network components.  They noted progress made through the TTC Joint Roadmap on Trustworthy AI and Risk Management and resolved to continue to promote interoperability in our emerging approaches to AI governance.  They also noted the quickening pace of technological innovation and the essential role the TTC plays in developing responsible rules of the road for critical and emerging technologies, including creating compatible and interoperable standards that reinforce the work of international standards development organizations.

The United States and EU also hosted two stakeholder events on the margins of the TTC: a “Roundtable on the Legacy Semiconductor Supply Chain,” where U.S. and EU industry leaders discussed the current state of the industry, how companies can improve supply chain resilience and transparency, and how governments can help address non-market policies and practices that lead to excessive dependency on any one producing country for legacy semiconductors; and a Transatlantic Initiative for Sustainable Trade (TIST) Stakeholder Event on “Crafting the Transatlantic Green Marketplace,” where participants discussed how to strengthen the transatlantic marketplace as a key factor in the development of sustainable and net-zero economies on both sides of the Atlantic.  

The TIST stakeholder event also included a workshop on the “Promotion of Good Quality jobs for a Successful, Just and Inclusive Green Transition,” which focused on labor and business stakeholders exchanging best practices and discussion on ensuring good jobs are outcomes of climate policy and investments. In addition, the United States and European Union received a briefing by the 6G Smart Networks and Services Industry Association and the Next G Alliance on their U.S.-EU Beyond 5G/6G Roadmap, which will inform efforts by U.S. and EU governments to develop common vision on 6G.  The United States and EU also welcomed the signing of the U.S.-EU Joint CyberSafe Products Action Plan on the margins of this TTC. With this Action Plan, the two partners look to create a transatlantic marketplace that sets a standard for the cybersecurity of Internet-connected products, ensuring the devices our citizens use in their homes and offices are secure.

The co-chairs intend to convene the sixth TTC ministerial meeting in Belgium in the spring of 2024 to review progress to inform priorities, identify new areas for collaboration, and further deepen the transatlantic partnership on shared priorities.

