Introduction.
 Thank you very much for that warm welcome. It’s a pleasure to be here in Shanghai this
afternoon. I want to thank the Shanghai Institute of Foreign Trade for inviting me to talk to you
today. It is fitting that an institute devoted to the study of international trade should reside in
Shanghai – a city that has contributed so much to and benefited so much from global commerce.
I am glad to have this opportunity to speak to such a distinguished group of scholars and
students of trade policy. You are the future leaders of government, academia, and the private
sector. As you go on with your careers, I hope that your energy, expertise, and ideas will support
continued market-oriented development in China, China’s continued participation in the
international rules-based trading system, and mutually beneficial U.S.-China economic relations.
 As the stewards of the U.S.-China economic relationship, you will have a high
responsibility. In my view, there is no more important bilateral trading relationship today than
that which exists between the U.S. and China.
 Today, I would like to talk with you about that relationship. About how growing U.S.-
China trade and investment linkages have benefited both countries. About challenges that we
face in that relationship – most significantly, the challenge posed by protectionism in both the
United States and China. And finally, about steps our governments can take to deepen our
cooperation on bilateral and global economic issues.
The Growth of U.S.-China Economic Ties.

The growing trade relationship between the United States and China marks the
convergence of two great economic forces: the United States, the largest economy in the world
and a leading proponent of trade liberalization, and China – the focal point of one of the great
economic transformations in history. Indeed, the United States and China, together with other
Asian countries, are the growth engines of the world today in large part because we have
embraced more open trade and market principles.
The dramatic growth of U.S.-China economic ties is the result of a historic
transformation in China. Beginning in the late 1970s, China’s introduction of market-oriented
economic reforms and its encouragement of export-led growth has helped to create the
conditions for economic opportunity.

The impact of these reforms has been impressive. China’s annual growth rate has
exceeded nine percent for over 20 years – it’s often been ten percent or more – and during this
period China has achieved a 500 percent increase in GDP. As a result, nearly 400 million people
have been lifted out of poverty. Since 1990, over $500 billion in foreign direct investment has
flowed into China, creating millions of jobs as well as know-how.
 In 1978, China accounted for less than one percent of the world’s economy and its total
trade was about $21 billion. Today, China is the second largest economy in the world in terms of
purchasing power. It accounts for four percent of global economic activity with foreign trade
over $1.1 trillion annually. It has become globally competitive in sectors that, less than a
generation ago, it barely competed in.
These changes have been dramatically reflected in the U.S.-China economic relationship
as well. In 1981, U.S. trade with China amounted to $5.5 billion. U.S. exports were in the
neighborhood of $3.6 billion, more than half of which were agricultural products, while Chinese
exports to the U.S. amounted to $1.9 billion, over half of which were simple manufactures.
China constituted the United States’ 16th largest export market, but only its 27
th
largest supplier
of imports, ranking behind countries like Malaysia, Indonesia, Australia and South Africa. There
was virtually no U.S. direct investment in China, nor any Chinese investment flows into the
United States. Given those numbers, it is not surprising that trade was not exactly the defining
issue in our relationship with China in 1981.
Fast forward twenty-four years. The tally for U.S. trade with China in 2005 amounts to
about $285 billion – more than 50 times the amount of bilateral trade in 1981. U.S. exports to
China for 2005 reached about $42 billion. Our exports today are substantially more diverse:
agriculture last year accounted for about one-eighth of our goods exports, with the rest of our
goods exports led by machinery, aircraft, and optical, photographic and medical equipment.
Chinese exports to the United States were in the neighborhood of $245 billion. China’s exports
to the United States today consist of a broad range of manufactures, representing China’s
strengths as a final point of assembly for companies in Asia and elsewhere, as well as by
traditional, simple manufactures such as apparel, footwear, and toys.
China has grown on a country basis from our 16th to our 4th largest goods export market –
trailing only Canada, Mexico, and Japan – and has become our second largest supplier of
imports, behind only Canada. And in the area of direct investment, the stock of U.S. investment
in China in 2004 – the most recent year for which data is available – reached an impressive $15.4
billion.
Both countries have benefited from this growth in trade and investment. U.S. consumers
today have access to an enormous range of Chinese-made goods at competitive prices, and U.S.
companies have enhanced their global competitiveness through their access to China’s
manufacturing base. And China has fueled its economic development through access to the U.S.
market.
But, as impressive as this growth has been, the potential for the relationship is even more
exciting. As the United States’ $12 trillion/year economy becomes increasingly integrated with China’s 1.3 billion-person economy – as established companies expand their presence in each
other’s markets and new companies find each other – trade and investment will continue to grow,
creating jobs and increasing prosperity in both the United States and China.
This will be reinforced by a stronger U.S. economic presence in the Asian region
generally. I have just come from visits to Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, and Philippines, and –
two weeks ago – was with President Bush in India. We are greatly encouraged by the economic
reforms and the growth that we are witnessing in Asia, and we are redoubling our efforts to
strengthen our trade and investment relationships with these and other countries in the region.
Doing so will only strengthen the U.S.-China relationship. 

Challenges in the Relationship
With all this good news – and with all the exciting potential for the relationship – one
could be tempted to assume that the future is assured. That, regardless of governmental policies,
the market will somehow find a way to keep the relationship growing. Taking that for granted
would be a mistake.
The fact is that – notwithstanding the positive developments – we face profound
challenges in our economic relationship. Perhaps most significantly, we face the threat of
protectionism on both sides of the Pacific.
In the United States, there are those on both sides of the political spectrum who would
seek to close down the U.S. market to China. When my boss, US Trade Representative
Ambassador Portman, was in China four months ago, he observed that if the U.S. Congress had
to vote again on China PNTR, it is unclear how the vote would turn out. In recent months, there
has been legislation proposed in the United States that could have a seriously adverse effect on
U.S.-China trade and investment. While President Bush has taken a strong stand in favor of free
trade and economic openness, he has faced criticism for doing so. For example, late last year, the
President declined to impose additional tariffs on standard steel pipe imported from China, which
he could have imposed in accordance with safeguard provisions negotiated as part of China’s
WTO accession. Although he resisted political pressures and kept the U.S. market open, he was
strongly criticized by U.S. steel companies and workers, and by members of Congress.
There are worrisome trends in China as well. There are numerous voices calling for new
policies and regulations to restrict market access by foreign firms, particularly in high technology
and service sectors. There are growing calls to provide protection, and other forms of
government support to domestic companies. And there signs that the government is listening to
these requests and is increasingly experimenting with mercantilist policies that seek to direct
markets rather than opening them. This is a mistake. Not only will these efforts generate trade
frictions, but they will also prevent the market from selecting optimal technologies, reducing the
efficiency and raising the cost structure of the entire Chinese economy.
Protectionism – like that we are witnessing in both the United States and China – finds
support when we are not vigilant in addressing the legitimate concerns that the other side has.

Accordingly – as trade policymakers – it is critical to try to see the relationship from each other’s
perspective.
From China’s perspective, I think that many Chinese policymakers believe that the
United States does not appreciate the breadth and depth of changes that China has made to open
its economy to the world. When the world urges them to do more … faster … they point out
that the Chinese economy has undergone dramatic change in the span of just 25 years –
reforming not only the domestic economy, but passing hundreds of laws and regulations that
have increasingly opened the Chinese economy to foreign companies. I believe that Chinese
interlocutors also are concerned that the United States does not appreciate the challenges that
China continues to face – in meeting aggressive economic growth targets, and in pushing
forward change through a complex bureaucracy.
I do not discount these perspectives. China has made substantial reforms, and deserves
credit for those reforms. As part of its WTO accession, China has lowered its tariffs on a wide
range of goods from an average of 25 percent to an average of seven percent; most import
license requirements have been eliminated; companies have been granted trading rights and
allowed to engage in distribution; and new opportunities have been created for many companies
in the service sector. And we do need to appreciate that change is difficult – it takes hard work
and political courage. One of the things that you – as Chinese students – can to help share here
is to share your perspectives on this with your American counterparts.
From the U.S. perspective, there are several concerns. There is concern that, while the
United States has fulfilled its commitment to open its market to Chinese companies, China is not
fulfilling its part of the bargain. There is growing frustration that China is not “playing by the
rules.” The huge and growing bilateral trade imbalance has served to fuel these concerns. I am
sure you can imagine that there would be similar concerns here if our positions were reversed
and China was running a $202 billion trade deficit with the United States.
American companies and workers are concerned that they cannot compete when China is
offering generous subsidies and other forms of support to favored industries, maintaining and
creating barriers to American goods and services while enjoying full access to U.S. markets. 

Americans do not believe that China is competing fairly when rampant piracy,
counterfeiting, and copyright infringement cost businesses billions of dollars each year. The
movie, music, publishing, software and electronic entertainment industries are areas where the
U.S. is especially competitive, and China’s weak enforcement of copyright laws has a
disproportionately heavy impact on our sales to China. IPR enforcement problems in China also
affect us in markets outside of China. Last year, for example, 69 percent of IPR infringing goods
seized by U.S. customs at the U.S. border had originated in China. A 2005 White Paper issued
jointly by the American Chamber of Commerce in China and the American Chamber of
Commerce in Shanghai reported that 80 percent of 331 American companies surveyed described
China’s IP protection as “ineffective” or “totally ineffective.” Of course, the failure to protect
intellectual property also hurts innovative Chinese companies, and could undermine China’s
efforts to continue to foster an even more dynamic, knowledge-based economy. 

Perhaps most fundamentally, many Americans are concerned about China’s commitment.
They question whether China is truly committed to free and fair trade when China fails to clamp
down vigorously on blatantly illegal activity, when it continues to pursue state interventionist
policies that distort markets, when it retains regulations that serve to block foreign access to
domestic markets. And they question China’s commitment to reform when China fails to take
action to address these concerns.
The upshot of these difficulties, not surprisingly, is that support in America for the
bilateral trading relationship is being challenged as never before.
Advancing the U.S.-China Relationship.
What then must we do to ensure that the economic benefits of the relationship are
protected – and the potential gains are achieved?
We must demonstrate that we can work together effectively to resolve bilateral issues.
Last month, the U.S. Trade Representative’s Office released a “Top to Bottom Review” of U.S.-
China Trade Policy. The review concludes that the U.S. trade relationship with China is entering
into a new phase. After a twenty-year period in which US policy was focused on getting China
into the WTO and then on China’s implementation of its accession commitments, U.S. policy
must now be readjusted to deal with China as a mature trading partner. As mature trading
partners, U.S. and China here is a long list of important issues on which we believe the U.S. and
Chinese governments need to make more progress. These include: protection for intellectual
property rights, market access issues related to telecommunications, financial services,
healthcare and direct sales; subsidies and structural issues, in sectors such as the steel industry;
standards; labor; environmental protection; and transparency and the rule of law. We believe
that progress in these areas will benefit China as well. 

That is why it is so important we take advantage of opportunities through institutions
such as the bilateral US-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade. Through positive
outcomes on these issues we will be able to demonstrate that we are making progress towards a
U.S.-China relationship that has greater equity, durability, and balance of opportunities that it
provides.
Looking beyond the bilateral issues, China can also take actions that demonstrate it is
prepared to play a role as a responsible stakeholder in the international economic system
commensurate with its commercial heft and with the benefit it has obtained from that system.
China needs to work closely with its partners in regional fora, such as APEC. Multilaterally,
China can strengthen the WTO by opening its markets beyond the specific requirements of its
accession agreements, and by playing a more active and positive role in the Doha Round
negotiations. The negotiations are at a critical juncture and the United States would welcome a
closer partnership with China in advancing the round.
As the International Monetary Fund has said, China can also contribute to the global
economy by helping to facilitate the adjustment of global macroeconomic imbalances by
increasing the flexibility of its currency and allowing it to demonstrate greater responsiveness to market forces. Accelerating financial sector and currency reform would not only demonstrate
that China is doing its part to contribute to the stability of the global economy, but would benefit
China’s economy as well.
The Bush Administration is committed to using cooperative bilateral mechanisms such as
the JCCT to the fullest extent possible to resolve bilateral trade and economic issues. However,
given China’s relatively recent accession to the WTO and our rapidly growing economic ties, it
is natural that we will have a large number of issues on which we have differences. Those that
we fail to resolve through bilateral consultations may need to be addressed through other means,
including WTO dispute settlement proceedings. In our Top-to-Bottom review, we indicate that
we need to strengthen our efforts to ensure that China complies with its international obligations
– which will benefit not only U.S. companies and workers, but China itself.
There are those who have asked me whether a more vigorous enforcement effort will
upset the bilateral relationship, or even lead to a trade war? My answer is no. Trade wars arise
when you don’t have dispute settlement mechanisms. An active dispute agenda should not strain
our relationship with China, any more than disputes with other major trading partners strains
those relationships.
I would look at it this way -- active participation in dispute settlement is reflective of
active and mature engagement in the world economy and in building and maintaining the
multilateral trading system.
The EU has been sued 63 times and the US 86 times since the WTO was created. Brazil
has brought 16 suits since 2000 alone – Korea 10. In many ways, China has been an anomaly in
terms of its isolation from the WTO dispute settlement process. China, the growing economic
colossus of Asia, has been the defendant in exactly one WTO case. That case – brought by the
United States -- challenged China’s imposition of a discriminatory semiconductor VAT. It
settled before going to a panel.
I suspect that this will change. In the future, China, as an important player in the
international trading system will more frequently be a party in WTO cases – either as a defendant
or complainant.
We should remember that dispute settlement was actually intended to de-politicize
disputes. Resorting to a quasi-judicial forum to resolve legal disputes, as we do in WTO dispute
settlement – is just another tool to address difficult trade issues not a weapon in a trade war.
Making use of this mechanisms that all WTO members have agreed to ought not get in the way
of other areas of cooperation – economic-, diplomatic-, security- related or otherwise.
Trade frictions arise even among the closest of partners. In a mature international
relationship, those frictions are dealt with on their own terms, while the broader relationship
continues to flourish. What is important is that we use all of the bilateral and multilateral means
available to solve problems on our bilateral trade agenda. 

Conclusion.
I am optimistic about the U.S.-China relationship. Our economies are growing increasingly
interdependent every day. We meet more frequently with our Chinese counterparts and I believe
that both sides understand the importance of making this relationship work. But I am realistic
about the challenges we face. China’s growing impact on the United States and the rest of the
global economy means that it is now being held to a higher standard – that of a mature trading
nation. Entering this new phase of our relationship requires that we approach our bilateral
dialogue with even greater ambition about the progress we must make on bilateral issues. China
should also embrace the new responsibilities it has as a leading player in the international
economy.
 The United States has played a constructive role in the supporting China’s integration
into the global economy and in its accession to the WTO. We will continue to do so. We look
forward to overcoming new challenges and creating even stronger commercial and political ties
in the years to come.
 If this is to be the Pacific century, both China and the United States, as Pacific economic
powers, will play important roles. We are firm in the belief that, if China continues on its course
of economic reform and liberalization, all the world’s trading nations will benefit from China’s
transformation. Thank you. 
