Introduction
●

Thank you all for coming.

●

As many of you know, in February of this year, we filed a case in
the World Trade Organization challenging China’s illegal
subsidies practices.

●

This case is enormously important. It challenged the kinds of
illegal subsidies that severely distort trade conditions for U.S.
manufacturers and producers − especially small and medium sized
enterprises − and their workers. As a result of such subsidies, a
range of domestically produced goods in the United States, from
steel to wood products to information technologies, are denied the
opportunity to compete fairly in the United States, in China, and in
third country markets where they are up against Chinese subsidies
that are illegal under the WTO.

●

Today, I am very pleased to report we have just signed an
agreement with China that will lead to complete elimination of
these WTO-prohibited subsidies. We expect the agreement to be
fully implemented by January 1, 2008.
• This outcome represents a victory for U.S. manufacturers,
producers and their workers. It is significant in three respects.
First, it eliminates a set of widely- available subsidies that create
significant disadvantages for U.S. products across many
manufacturing sectors. Second, it shows that Chinese
policymakers understand the need to respect the strict WTO
prohibitions on these kinds of subsidies in the future. It also
demonstrates that our two nations can work together to resolve
major differences. Third, it shows that President Bush’s approach
to resolving trade disputes with China – dialogue if possible, legal
action when necessary, and working within the rules-based system
- gets real results.

U.S. Approach Works
●

In this case, as in others, we have been clear: Where China fails to
live up to its WTO obligations, we will use the full array of tools
available to secure compliance.

-2-

●

We began by engaging China in dialogue, but it became clear that
dialogue alone was not leading the Chinese government to address
our concerns. So, we invoked the WTO dispute resolution process.
At the same time, we made clear our preference for the right result
- and not simply drawn-out litigation for its own sake.

●

The result? A pragmatic outcome from the WTO dispute
settlement process with the excellent result that I am announcing
today.

Specifics of the Case
●

From a legal perspective, this case is relatively straightforward.

●

We were prepared to prove that China had been violating WTO
subsidies rules by continuing to use two broad types of prohibited
subsidies across the spectrum of industry sectors in China −
including steel, wood products, information technology, and many
others.

●

First, export subsidies – these subsidies have given an unfair
competitive advantage to Chinese products and denied U.S.

-3-

manufacturers the chance to compete fairly in the United States
and in third country markets.
●

Second, the Chinese will eliminate “import substitution” subsidies.
These subsidies have encouraged companies in China to purchase
Chinese-made goods instead of imports. They have given
Chinese-made goods an unfair edge in the China market over highquality, fairly priced goods from the United States and other
countries.

●

These two types of subsidies − export subsidies and import
substitution subsidies − are considered to be “prohibited subsidies”
by the WTO. That means they are so trade-distorting that WTO
rules prohibit them outright.

●

But, the Chinese government has been slow to emerge from its
historical role controlling the economy. We have been urging
China to eliminate all industrial policies, like these prohibited
subsidies, which interfere so fundamentally with market-driven
economic and trade outcomes.

-4-

Trade Impact
●

At its core, this case was about standing up for American
manufacturers and workers. The trade-distorting subsidies we
challenged created significant disadvantages for U.S. products in
our home market, in China, and in third country markets.

●

The prohibited subsidies that China has now agreed to discontinue
were widely available across many manufacturing sectors in
China, and they offered sizeable benefits.

●

For example, the export subsidies included benefits like substantial
income tax reductions that had the potential to benefit up to 60
percent of China’s exports.

●

It is difficult for companies to compete when the playing field is so
uneven. It is especially hard on small and medium-sized
enterprises and their workers.

●

China’s renunciation of the banned subsidies we challenged is
excellent news for China as a WTO Member and excellent news
for world trade. In this area, we will now have a more level
playing field – a direct benefit of the rules-based system.

-5-

U.S.-China Trade Relations
●

I want to underscore that the way this dispute was resolved stands
as a victory for both countries. It demonstrates that mature trading
partners can use the WTO process to work through their
differences.

●

The United States is also encouraged that the terms of the
agreement reflect a conscious decision by China – for its own
benefit – to reject the economic thinking that has relied on these
kinds of distorting subsidies in the past. That is good for China as
a WTO member and good for the world at large.

●

We face many challenges in our trade relationship with China, and
this is only one aspect. But it is an important one.

There is still

much work to be done to meet the challenges of our growing and
complex relationship with China – and it will be difficult work.
More results are needed, and at a faster pace.

-6-

Conclusion
●

Let me make two final points before I conclude.

●

First, I would like to note that I have consulted closely with
Congress as we have developed strategies for dealing with difficult
issues like prohibited subsidies, and Members with whom I have
spoken appreciate the value of results over rhetoric.
• I think this announcement makes clear that the Administration’s
policy of serious dialogue and resolute enforcement is delivering
real results. It clearly shows the wisdom of this approach over
some legislative approaches that would simply impose retaliatory
tariffs.
• What we have done will actually benefit U.S. manufacturers and
workers. What we should avoid is a needlessly hostile relationship
with China which will, in the long run, only hurt U.S. workers and
consumers.

●

Second, I want to express my appreciation to the Government of
Mexico, our co-complainant in this case, and in particular Minister

-7-

Eduardo Sojo, for working with us so closely on this dispute at the
WTO.
●

Thank you. I would be happy to take your questions.

-8-

