Thank you, Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member 
Crapo, members of the committee, for inviting me to testify on 
the President's trade agenda.
    Our worker-centric trade policy is a key part of the Biden-
Harris administration's effort to Build Back Better. We are 
making real strides towards ending the pandemic. There are 
pockets of progress and hope, but we still have a lot of work 
ahead.
    I want to thank Congress for passing the American Rescue 
Plan, which has already helped gets shots in arms and money in 
the pockets of millions of Americans. We are seeing the 
economic benefits of that quick action here in the United 
States; we are on track for a full economic recovery. More 
needs to be done.
    The American Jobs Plan and the American Family Plan would 
combine to make the United States a healthier, safer, more 
prosperous, fairer, and a more competitive nation. They would 
make full investments that build a better foundation for 
decades of economic growth.
    These extraordinary times demand extraordinary leadership 
and creativity to defeat COVID-19. The announcement last week 
that the United States will not let intellectual property 
rights get in the way of saving lives is just one part of the 
administration's global effort.
    We will pursue text-based negotiations at the WTO, which 
may take time, but I am encouraged that other countries have 
already announced that they will roll up their sleeves and join 
us.
    We will also continue to ramp up our efforts working with 
the private sector and other partners to expand vaccine 
manufacturing and distribution around the world. This 
comprehensive effort will not only save lives but also help 
heal the economy.
    And as we reengage the world from a position of strength, 
support from Congress gives us more authority and opportunity 
to deliver results for the American people. We want a fair 
international trading system that promotes inclusive growth and 
reflects America's universal values. For too long, we have 
overlooked the effect of our trade policies on individual 
workers, who are human beings living in a community trying to 
survive and to thrive.
    The worker-centered trade policy outlined in the 
President's trade report will foster broad-based equitable 
growth, increase innovation, and give workers a seat at the 
table.
    Last week, I announced our transparency principles and the 
appointment of our Chief Transparency Officer, whom Chairman 
Wyden knows well. Together they show our commitment to 
comprehensive public participation, and they are just the 
starting point.
    For the first time, the President's trade agenda included 
the goal of racial equity. Our thoughtful, sustained engagement 
will help us better understand how our proposed policies affect 
all communities, and we will consider those effects before 
making policy decisions.
    Trade policy must also help protect the environment and 
fight climate change. For too long, we have seen a race to the 
bottom, but we can use trade tools to incentivize a race to the 
top and build a cleaner and brighter future with high-paying, 
quality jobs.
    Our farmers, ranchers, fishers, and food processors will 
also benefit from our new approach. We are turning the page on 
erratic trade policies and looking to expand global market 
opportunity while enforcing global trade standards and ensuring 
that trade partners live up to their commitments.
    Sustained American leadership and reengagement with our 
allies, trading partners, and economic competitors will be key. 
The Leaders Climate Summit in April showed that we can rally 
the world to tackle big challenges. We will work with the World 
Trade Organization's new Director General, Dr. Ngozi Okonjo-
Iweala, and like-minded countries to reform the WTO's rules and 
procedures so they can be a relevant force for good in the 21st 
century.
    We are also working to resolve the ongoing Boeing/Airbus 
dispute and addressing the real problem of overcapacity in the 
steel and aluminum sectors coming primarily from China.
    These talks will take time, but I believe a resolution is 
possible. We will not hesitate to call out China's coercive and 
unfair trade practices that harm American workers, undermine 
the multilateral system, or violate basic human rights. And we 
are working towards a strong strategic approach to our trade 
and economic relationship with China.
    We welcome fair competition, and if China cannot or will 
not adapt to international rules and norms, we must take steps 
to level the playing field.
    Closer to home, we are using every tool available to make 
sure our existing agreements work and have a positive impact on 
real people. The USMCA gives me confidence that this approach 
is worthwhile.
    USMCA is a starting point for future efforts in the region 
that will explicitly acknowledge climate change, aggressively 
address global forced labor issues, and expand the benefits of 
trade to women and historically underserved communities.
    I will enforce the new standards, follow through on our 
commitments, and use the agreement to ensure that Canada and 
Mexico do too. This week you have seen that we are committed to 
using these tools. The innovative rapid response mechanism will 
allow us to address longstanding labor issues in Mexico. Today 
I am proud to announce the inaugural use of this mechanism in 
our request that Mexico review whether workers at a General 
Motors facility are being denied the right of free association 
and collective bargaining. I commend the Government of Mexico 
for stepping in when it became aware of voting irregularities 
earlier this year.
    I am proud to partner on this shared goal of helping both 
Mexican and American workers prevent a race to the bottom.
    As you can see, we have our work cut out for us, but I am 
confident that we can walk, chew gum, and play chess at the 
same time. The professional and dedicated public servants at 
USTR are working hard to implement the President's trade 
agenda, and I am proud to carry the strength and creativity of 
our small but mighty agency into the room today.
    Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your 
questions.

Thank you, Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the 
committee, for inviting me here today to testify on the President's 
trade agenda.

    Our worker-centric trade policy is a key part of the Biden-Harris 
administration's effort to Build Back Better. We are making real 
strides towards ending the pandemic. There are pockets of progress and 
hope. But we still have a lot of work ahead.

    I want to thank Congress for passing the American Rescue Plan, 
which has already helped get shots in arms and money in the pockets of 
millions of Americans. We're seeing the economic benefits of that quick 
action here in the United States. We're on track for a full economic 
recovery, though more needs to be done.

    The American Jobs Plan and the American Families Plan would combine 
to make the United States a healthier, safer, more prosperous, fairer, 
and more competitive nation. They would make bold investments that 
build a better foundation for decades of economic growth.

    We know these extraordinary times demand extraordinary leadership 
and creativity to find solutions that can defeat COVID-19. The 
announcement last week that the United States will not let intellectual 
property rights get in the way of saving lives is just one part of the 
administration's global effort. We will pursue text-based negotiations 
at the WTO, which may take time. But I am encouraged that other 
countries have already announced that they will roll up their sleeves 
and join us.

    We will also continue to ramp up our efforts--working with the 
private sector and all possible partners--to expand vaccine 
manufacturing and distribution around the world, including access to 
the raw materials needed to produce those vaccines. This comprehensive 
effort will not only save lives, but also help heal the economy. And as 
we reengage the world, our trading partners, and international 
institutions from a position of strength, support from Congress gives 
us more authority and opportunity to deliver results for the American 
people.

    We want a fair international trading system that promotes inclusive 
growth and reflects America's universal values. Trade policy must 
respect the dignity of work and value Americans as workers and wage-
earners. For too long, we have overlooked the effect of our trade 
policies on individual workers, who are human beings, living in a 
community trying to survive and thrive. The worker-centered trade 
policy outlined in the President's trade agenda builds on progress made 
in the USMCA. Our goal is to foster broad-based, equitable growth, 
increase innovation, and give workers a seat at the table.

    The transparency principles I announced last week reflect the 
administration's commitment to comprehensive public involvement in 
developing trade policy. The principles, along with the appointment of 
our Chief Transparency Officer, are just the starting point.

    For the first time, the President's trade agenda included the goal 
of racial equity. Our thoughtful, sustained engagement with new--and 
all too frequently silenced--voices will give the Biden-Harris 
administration a better understanding of how our proposed policies 
affect all communities. And we will consider those effects on people of 
color, minority-owned businesses, and aspirational entrepreneurs before 
making policy decisions.

    Trade policy must also help protect the environment and fight 
climate change. For too long, we've seen a race to the bottom that 
suppressed environmental protection to attract investment. We can use 
trade tools to incentivize a race to the top and build a cleaner and 
brighter future, with new market opportunities and high-paying, quality 
jobs. And by encouraging fresh, collaborative thinking, we can forge 
consensus among diverse groups and find solutions that we never knew 
existed.

    Our farmers, ranchers, fishers, and food processors will benefit 
from our new approach, and they are essential to meeting our climate 
and sustainability goals. We are turning the page on erratic trade 
policies. USTR's goal is to pursue smarter policies that expand global 
market opportunities while enforcing global trade standards and 
ensuring that trading partners live up to their commitments.

    Sustained, American leadership and reengagement with our allies, 
trading partners, and economic competitors will be key. The Leaders' 
Climate Summit in April showed that we can rally the world to tackle 
big challenges. In the early meetings with my counterparts, I have 
stressed that the United States will be a constructive partner, and we 
welcome the frank and open dialogue.

    We will work with the World Trade Organization's new Director-
General, Dr. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, and like-minded countries to reform 
the WTO's rules and procedures so it can be a relevant force for good 
in the 21st-century global economy.

    We are also working with the European Union and the United Kingdom 
to resolve the ongoing Boeing/Airbus dispute and are having 
constructive discussions to address the real problem of overcapacity in 
the steel and aluminum sectors coming primarily from China. These talks 
will take time, but I believe a resolution is possible and worth 
pursuing.

    Those two issues underscore the importance of our ongoing 
comprehensive efforts to address trade frictions with our allies and 
strategic partners so that we can turn to focusing on the challenges 
facing us today and tomorrow. We will not hesitate to call out China's 
coercive and unfair trade practices that harm American workers, 
undermine the multilateral system, or violate basic human rights. We 
are working towards a strong, strategic approach to our trade and 
economic relationship with China.

    We welcome the competition. But the competition must be fair, and 
if China cannot or will not adapt to international rules and norms, we 
must be bold and creative in taking steps to level the playing field 
and enhance our own capabilities and partnerships. I've been encouraged 
that our trading partners also recognize this challenge, and they are 
willing to find a common approach to our shared concerns. Our security 
will depend on diversifying and securing the supply lines for products. 
Improving our trade relations with trusted allies and partners will not 
only improve our prosperity but our national security.

    Closer to home, we are using every tool available to make sure our 
existing agreements work and have a positive impact on real people. The 
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement gives me confidence that this 
approach is worthwhile. We must invest and commit to the agreement's 
full and successful implementation. USMCA is a starting point for 
future efforts in the region that explicitly acknowledges climate 
change, aggressively addresses global forced labor issues, and expands 
the benefits of trade to women and historically underserved 
communities.

    I will enforce the new standards, follow through on our 
commitments, and use the agreement to ensure that Canada and Mexico do 
too. The updated agreement now includes the most comprehensive, 
enforceable labor and environmental standards of any U.S. trade 
agreement--and, I would argue, any trade agreement. And this week, 
you've seen that we're committed to using the tools.

    The innovative rapid response mechanism will allow us to address 
longstanding labor issues in Mexico. Today I am proud to announce the 
inaugural use of this mechanism in our request that Mexico review 
whether workers at a General Motors facility in Silao, located in the 
State of Guanajuato, are being denied the right of free association and 
collective bargaining.

    I commend the Government of Mexico for stepping in when it became 
aware of voting irregularities earlier this year. I am proud to partner 
on this shared goal of helping both Mexican and American workers 
prevent a race to the bottom. This use of the rapid response mechanism 
demonstrates that we will act when workers in certain facilities are 
denied their rights under laws necessary to fulfill Mexico's labor 
obligations.

    As you can see, we have our work cut out for us. But I'm confident 
that we can walk, chew gum, and play chess at the same time. The 
professional and dedicated public servants at USTR are working hard to 
implement the President's trade agenda. And I am proud to carry the 
strength and creativity of our small, but mighty agency into the room 
today.

    Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your questions.
