Notice of Determination Pursuant to Section 301: China's Targeting of the Maritime, Logistics, and Shipbuilding Sectors for Dominance

Office of the United States Trade Representative

SUMMARY: The U.S. Trade Representative has determined that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is actionable under section 301.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Summary of the Petition

On March 12, 2024, five labor unions filed a section 301 petition regarding the acts, policies, and practices of China to dominate the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sector. The petition was filed pursuant to section 302(a)(1) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (Trade Act) (19 U.S.C. 2412(a)(1)), requesting action pursuant to section 301(b) (19 U.S.C. 2411(b)).

Petitioners allege that China targets the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sector for dominance and engages in a wide range of unreasonable or discriminatory acts, policies, and practices that provide unfair advantages across maritime industries, such as shipbuilding, shipping, and maritime equipment. The petitioners also aver that China threatens to discriminate against U.S. commerce and disrupt supply chains. Petitioners allege that China's acts, policies, and practices burden or restrict U.S. commerce in various manners.

II. Proceedings in the Investigation

On April 17, 2024, after consultation with the appropriate advisory committees and the Section 301 Committee, USTR initiated an investigation regarding the issues raised in the petition pursuant to section 302(a)(2) of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2412(a)(2)). The notice of initiation solicited written comments on, inter alia: China's acts, policies, and practices targeting the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance; whether China's acts, policies, and practices targeting the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance are unreasonable or discriminatory; China's efforts to dominate the global maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors, including the upstream and downstream supply chain, as well as shipping services; information on other acts, policies, and practices of China relating to the maritime, logistics and shipbuilding sectors; whether China's acts, policies, and practices burden or restrict U.S. commerce, and if so, the nature and level of the burden or restriction.

Interested persons filed over 40 written comments. USTR and the Section 301 Committee convened a public hearing on May 29, 2024, during which witnesses provided testimony and responded to questions.

On April 17, 2024, the U.S. Trade Representative requested consultations with the government of China pursuant to section 303 of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2413). The government of China has declined to hold consultations under the statutory framework regarding the investigation.

Based on information obtained during the investigation, including the public submissions and the public hearing, USTR and the Section 301 Committee have prepared a report on the acts, policies, and practices under investigation. The report supports a determination that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce and thus is actionable. The report is available to the public on the USTR website.

III. China's Targeting of the Maritime, Logistics, and Shipbuilding Sectors for Dominance

For nearly three decades, China has targeted the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance and has employed increasingly aggressive and specific targets in pursuing dominance. China has largely achieved its dominance goals, severely disadvantaging U.S. companies, workers, and the U.S. economy generally through lessened competition and commercial opportunities and through the creation of economic security risks from dependencies and vulnerabilities.

Top-down industrial planning and targeting is a critical feature of China's state-led, non-market economic system. China organizes the development of its economy at a high level through broad national-level five-year economic and social development plans. It then employs industry-specific plans that typically align chronologically with the national five-year plans. These plans often contain detailed quantitative and qualitative targets, including for production, domestic content, and domestic and international market shares, and outline the non-market policies and practices China should use to achieve these targets. China's plans reveal its targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance.

Market share targets necessitate substitution by Chinese companies at the expense of foreign competitors—for Chinese companies to gain market share, they must displace foreign companies in existing markets and take new markets as they develop in the future. China's industrial targets have become more aggressive and sophisticated over the years.

China's targeting of these sectors for dominance has undercut competition and taken market share with dramatic effect: raising China's shipbuilding market share from less than 5 percent of global tonnage in 1999, to over 50 percent in 2023; increasing China's ownership of the commercial world fleet to over 19 percent as of January 2024; and controlling production of 95 percent of shipping containers and 86 percent of the world's supply of intermodal chassis, among other components and products.

IV. Determination on the Acts, Policies, or Practices Under Investigation

Based on the information obtained during the investigation, as reflected in the public report on the investigation, and taking account of public comments, as well as the advice of the Section 301 Committee and advisory committees, the U.S. Trade Representative has made the following determination under sections 301(b) and 304(a) of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2411(b) and 2414(a)): China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce, and thus is actionable under section 301(b) of the Trade Act.

In particular, China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable because: it displaces foreign firms, deprives market-oriented businesses and their workers of commercial opportunities, and lessens competition; and it creates dependencies on China, increasing risk and reducing supply chain resilience. China's targeting for dominance also is unreasonable because of China's extraordinary control over its economic actors and these sectors.

Furthermore, China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance burdens or restricts U.S. commerce by: undercutting business opportunities for and investments in the U.S. maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors; restricting competition and choice; creating economic security risks from dependence and vulnerabilities in sectors critical to the functioning of the U.S. economy; and undermining supply chain resilience.

These findings provide a basis for finding that responsive action is appropriate to obtain the elimination of the acts, policies, or practices covered in the investigation.

V. Further Proceedings

Sections 301(b) and 304(a)(1)(B) of the Trade Act provide that if the U.S. Trade Representative determines that an act, policy, or practice of a foreign country is unreasonable orNOTICE OF ACTION AND PROPOSED ACTION IN SECTION 301 INVESTIGATION OF CHINA'S TARGETING THE MARITIME, LOGISTICS, AND SHIPBUILDING SECTORS FOR DOMINANCE, REQUEST FOR COMMENTS

Office of the United States Trade Representative
Federal Register Citation: 90 FR 17114
Document Number: 2025-06927
Publication Date: April 23, 2025

AGENCY: Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR).

ACTION: Notice of action and proposed action, request for comments, and notice of public hearing.

SUMMARY: The U.S. Trade Representative has determined that appropriate action in this investigation includes: certain services fees on the maritime transport services of Chinese operators and shipowners; on maritime transport services of operators using Chinese-built vessels to be applicable on a non-discriminatory basis; certain service fees on the maritime transport services of operators of foreign-built vehicle carriers to be applicable on a non-discriminatory basis; and restrictions on certain maritime transport services for U.S. Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) to be applicable on a non-discriminatory basis. In addition, the U.S. Trade Representative is proposing additional tariffs on certain ship-to-shore cranes on a non-discriminatory basis, and proposing additional tariffs on certain other cargo handling equipment of China. USTR requests written comments regarding the proposed tariff actions set forth in this notice and will convene a public hearing in relation to the proposed tariffs.

A. Background

On March 12, 2024, petitioners filed a Section 301 petition regarding the acts, policies, and practices of China to dominate the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors. The petition was filed pursuant to Section 302(a) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (Trade Act) (19 U.S.C. 2412(a)), requesting action pursuant to Section 301(b) of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2411(b)).

On April 17, 2024, after consultations with the appropriate advisory committees and the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative initiated an investigation of China's acts, policies, and practices targeting the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance. The U.S. Trade Representative also requested consultations with the government of China pursuant to Section 303 of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2413). The government of China declined to hold consultations regarding the investigation under this statutory framework.

Based on the information obtained during the investigation, on January 16, 2025, USTR released a public report on the investigation. The "Report on China's Targeting of the Maritime, Logistics, and Shipbuilding Sectors for Dominance" (Report) supports the determination that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce and thus is actionable.

As detailed in the Report, for nearly three decades, China has targeted the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance and has employed increasingly aggressive and specific targets in pursuing dominance. China's dominance severely disadvantages U.S. companies, workers, and the U.S. economy generally, through lessened competition and commercial opportunities and through the creation of economic security risks from dependencies and vulnerabilities.

Top-down industrial planning and targeting is a critical feature of China's state-led, non-market economic system. China organizes the development of its economy at a high level through broad, national-level, five-year economic and social development plans. It then employs industry-specific plans that typically align chronologically with the national five-year plans. These plans often contain detailed quantitative and qualitative targets, including for production, domestic content, and domestic and international market shares, and outline the non-market policies and practices China should use to achieve these targets. China's plans reveal its targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance.

Market share targets necessitate substitution by Chinese companies at the expense of foreign competitors—for Chinese companies to gain market share, they must displace foreign companies in existing markets and take new markets as they develop in the future. China's industrial targets have become more aggressive and sophisticated over the years.

China's targeting of these sectors for dominance has undercut competition and taken market share with dramatic effect: raising China's shipbuilding market share from less than five percent of global tonnage in 1999, to over 50 percent in 2023; increasing China's ownership of the commercial world fleet to over 19 percent as of January 2024; and controlling production of over 70 percent of ship-to-shore cranes, 86 percent of intermodal chassis, 95 percent of shipping containers, and increasing shares of other components and products.

Based on the information obtained during the investigation, as reflected in the Report on the investigation, and taking into account public comments, as well as the advice of the Section 301 Committee and appropriate advisory committees, the U.S. Trade Representative determined that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable and burdens or restricts U.S. commerce, and thus is actionable under Sections 301(b) and 304(a) of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2411(b) and 2414(a)).

In particular, the U.S. Trade Representative determined that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance is unreasonable because it displaces foreign firms, deprives market-oriented businesses and their workers of commercial opportunities, and lessens competition, and creates dependencies on China, increasing risk and reducing supply chain resilience. China's targeting for dominance also is unreasonable because of China's extraordinary control over its economic actors and these sectors.

Furthermore, the U.S. Trade Representative determined that China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance burdens or restricts U.S. commerce by undercutting business opportunities for and investments in the U.S. maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors; restricting competition and choice; creating economic security risks from dependence and vulnerabilities in sectors critical to the functioning of the U.S. economy; and undermining supply chain resilience.

On February 21, 2025, the U.S. Trade Representative proposed that action was appropriate and to take responsive action in the form of service fees against certain maritime transport services of China. USTR also proposed that certain maritime transport service fees and restrictions would be applicable on a nondiscriminatory basis. USTR proposed certain service fees on: (1) Chinese maritime transport operators, (2) maritime transport operators with fleets comprised of Chinese-built vessels, and (3) maritime transport operators with prospective orders for Chinese vessels. USTR also proposed to refund fees paid by maritime transport operators per entry of a U.S.-built vessel through which the operator is providing international maritime transport services. USTR proposed certain restrictions on international maritime transport of U.S. goods, and sought public comment on other actions to reduce the exposure and risks from China's promotion of LOGINK and similar platforms.

USTR received nearly 600 comments in the response to the notice, and nearly 60 individuals participated in the public hearings.

On April 9, 2025, the President issued Executive Order 14269, "Restoring America's Maritime Dominance." With respect to the actions to be taken in this investigation, if any, Section 5 of the Executive Order directs the U.S. Trade Representative to: (i) coordinate with appropriate agencies to collect additional information, as appropriate and to the extent permitted by law, in support of administering such actions; and (ii) coordinate with the Attorney General and Secretary of Homeland Security to take appropriate steps to enforce any restriction, fee, penalty, or duty imposed pursuant to such actions. Additionally, as part of the actions in this investigation, Executive Order 14269 directs the U.S. Trade Representative to consider proposing: (i) tariffs on ship-to-shore (STS) cranes manufactured, assembled, or made using components of PRC origin, or manufactured anywhere in the world by a company owned, controlled, or substantially influenced by a PRC national; and (ii) tariffs on other cargo handling equipment.

Executive Order 14269 also describes additional policies to broadly address China's targeting of the maritime, logistics, and shipbuilding sectors for dominance, including the creation of a Maritime Action Plan (Section 3); the engagement of allies and partners to align trade policies, including with respect to this investigation (Section 7); efforts to reduce dependence on adversaries by recommending incentives for shipbuilders in allied nations to undertake capital investment in the United States (Section 8); and the development of a legislative proposal for a maritime security trust fund that considers using revenue, including from this action, to establish a reliable, dedicated funding source for programs under the Maritime Action Plan (Section 9).

B. Determination of Action

On January 16, 2025, USTR issued a notice which announced the U.S. Trade Representative's determination that China's acts, policies, and practices under investigation are unreasonable or discriminatory and burden or restrict U.S. commerce, and are thus actionable under section 301(b) of the Trade Act. Section 301(b) of the Trade Act provides that upon determining that the acts, policies, and practices under investigation are actionable and that action is appropriate, the U.S. Trade Representative shall take all appropriate and feasible action authorized under Section 301(c) of the Trade Act, subject to the specific direction, if any, of the President regarding such action, and all other appropriate and feasible action within the power of the President that the President may direct the U.S. Trade Representative to take under section 301(b) of the Trade Act, to obtain the elimination of those acts, policies, or practices.

Section 301(c)(1)(B) of the Trade Act authorizes, the U.S. Trade Representative to "impose duties or other import restrictions on the goods of [the foreign country subject to the investigation] and, notwithstanding any other provision of law, fees or restrictions on the services of, [the foreign country subject to the investigation]." Sections 301(c)(3)(A) and (B) of the Trade Act provide further authority for the U.S. Trade Representative to take any of the actions he is authorized to take under section 301(b) against any good or economic sector, on a non-discriminatory basis or solely against the foreign country concerned, and without regard to whether such goods or economic sector were involved in the act, policy, or practice under investigation.

USTR and the Section 301 Committee have carefully reviewed the public comments and the testimony from the two-day public hearing regarding the proposed actions. USTR has also considered the advice of advisory committees and consulted with the agencies which regulate the services involved. Considering the comments and advice, and pursuant to sections 301(b), 301(c), and 304(a) of the Trade Act (19 U.S.C. 2411(b), 2411(c), and 2414(a)), the U.S. Trade Representative has determined that action is appropriate, and that appropriate and feasible action in this investigation includes the actions as provided for in Annexes I, II, III, and IV to this notice.

Fees on Maritime Transport Services

Phased fee on Chinese vessel operators and vessel owners. This fee, based on the net tonnage of the vessel, is assessed against any vessel with a Chinese operator or owned by an entity of China. If a vessel makes multiple U.S. entries before transiting to a foreign destination, this fee is assessed per rotation or string of U.S. port calls. The fee will be set at $0 for the first 180 days, will then be set at $50/NT, and will increase incrementally over the next three years.

Phased fee on Chinese-built vessels. This fee is based on the higher of (i) a fee based on the net tonnage of the vessel, or (ii) a fee based on per container. If a vessel makes multiple U.S. entries before transiting to a foreign destination, this fee is assessed per rotation or string of U.S. port calls. The fee will be set at $0 for the first 180 days and increases incrementally over the next three years. Certain Chinese-built vessels are not subject to the fee, including: certain vessels enrolled in certain U.S. Maritime Administration programs (e.g., the Maritime Security Program and Tanker Security Program); vessels arriving empty or in ballast; vessels below certain size or capacity thresholds; vessels engaged in short sea shipping (i.e., voyages of less than 2,000 nautical miles from certain U.S. ports); certain U.S.-owned companies' vessels; and certain specialized export vessels. A vessel operator is eligible for a fee remission for up to three years if it orders and takes delivery of a U.S.-built vessel of equivalent size.

Phased fee on vessel operators of foreign vehicle carriers. This fee is assessed on any foreign-built vehicle carrier based on its Car Equivalent Unit (CEU) capacity. The fee will be set at $0 for 180 days, and will then be set at $150 per CEU capacity of the entering non-U.S. built vessel. An operator could receive a fee remission for up to three years if it orders and takes delivery of a U.S.-built vessel of equivalent or greater capacity within that time period. A vessel operator will be eligible for a fee remission for three years if it orders and takes delivery of a U.S.-built vessel of at least equivalent size.

Restrictions on Services To Promote the Transport of U.S. Goods on U.S. Vessels

Restrictions on certain maritime transport. After three years, USTR would impose a restriction to require the use of U.S. vessels for the maritime transport of a certain percentage of LNG exports. An operator or its non-compliant LNG vessel may be licensed to operate for up to three years as if the requirement is met, if that operator orders and takes delivery of a U.S.-built LNG vessel of equivalent or greater capacity within that time period. USTR will consult with the U.S. Department of Energy and other agencies, as appropriate, to provide notice and further technical information regarding this restriction.

Actions Directed by the President in Executive Order 14269, "Restoring America's Maritime Dominance"

Consistent with the President's direction in Executive Order 14269, "Restoring America's Maritime Dominance," the U.S. Trade Representative is proposing additional duties on STS cranes, in a manner consistent with the description in the Executive Order, and on containers and certain chassis of China, consistent with the Executive Order 14269's direction regarding other cargo handling equipment of China.

C. Responses to Significant Comments Regarding the Proposed Actions

Service Fee on Maritime Transport Operators

The U.S. Trade Representative proposed a service fee on Chinese maritime transport operators at a flat rate of up to $1,000,000 per entrance of any vessel of that operator to a U.S. port, or at a rate of up $1,000 per net ton of the vessel's capacity per entrance of any vessel of that operator to a U.S. port.

USTR received several comments in response to the proposals. Many of the comments agreed with the U.S. Trade Representative's determination that some form of responsive action was required in light of measures taken by China to dominate the maritime, shipbuilding and logistics sector. The comments generally urged revisions to the proposed fee schedule in order to lessen disproportionate economic impact, and also urged delays in the imposition of fees.

USTR also received a number of comments asserting that the proposed fee would exert more leverage on China, and thus be more effective at obtaining the elimination of China's practices, if fees were directed at vessel owners, rather than operators. These comments assessed that vessel operators would be more likely to pass along any fee to importers and that, as result, a fee directed at operators would likely be ineffective in changing operator behavior in procuring Chinese vessels for international transport.

Considering the public comments, the U.S. Trade Representative has made certain adjustments to the proposed fee on maritime transport to include any vessel operated by Chinese crew, or any vessel owned by an entity of China. In response to public comments regarding the amount of the fee, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined to assess the fee on a net tonnage basis, with the initial fee set at $0 for the first 180 days from the date of determination (that is, until October 14, 2025). This fee will then increase to a rate of $50 per NT and will increase on an annual basis for three years. In consideration of potential impacts to small ports if a fee were to be assessed at each port of call, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined to assess the fee upon entry at the first U.S. port or place from a foreign destination per rotation or string of U.S. port calls.

In response to comments regarding the effectiveness of a fee on Chinese operators, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined to assess the fee on any Chinese vessel operator and on any vessel owned by a Chinese entity. Imposing a fee on a vessel owner may more directly influence purchasing decisions and exact more financial pressure on Chinese shipbuilders, thus providing an even more significant source of leverage to encourage China to eliminate the investigated practices. The U.S. Trade Representative has also determined to implement the initial proposal to assess a fee on a Chinese operator to further disincentivize use of Chinese shipping services.

Service Fee on Maritime Transport Operators With Fleets Comprised of Chinese-Built Vessels

The U.S. Trade Representative proposed a flat fee of up to $1,500,000 per vessel entry of a Chinese-built vessel to a U.S. port. The U.S. Trade Representative also proposed escalating fees per vessel entry to a U.S. port based on the percentage of Chinese-built vessels in the operator's fleet. The U.S. Trade Representative also proposed a flat fee of up to $1,000,000 per vessel entry to a U.S. port when an operator's fleet is comprised of 25 percent or more Chinese-built vessels.

In response to the proposals, several comments expressed concerns that the proposed fees would result in higher prices and shortages for American importers and consumers. Comments also expressed concerns that the proposals would cause U.S. exports, particularly bulk cargo exports, to be more expensive. Some commenters stated that the proposed fees and attendant increased costs of imports and exports would put them out of business. Commenters argue that the fees should be aimed at Chinese state-owned operators, rather than non-Chinese operators. Some comments noted the lack of capacity of U.S. shipbuilders and questioned whether the proposed fees would do anything to address the cost advantage enjoyed by Chinese shipbuilders.

A few comments agreed with the proposals, noting that the proposed fees would address trade imbalances, enhance national security, support investment in the American maritime industrial base, and promote higher environmental and labor standards. One commenter suggested that the proposed fees be captured in a U.S. shipbuilding and mariner compensation trust fund to be expended each year for reviving the U.S. merchant marine.

Considering the public comments and the advice of the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined not to impose any fee based on fleet composition at this time. The U.S. Trade Representative has determined instead to impose a fee on maritime transport using any Chinese-built vessels. This fee is applied on a non-discriminatory basis.

In response to comments regarding a phase-in or transition period, the fee on Chinese-built vessels will be set at $0 for the first 180 days from the date of determination (that is, until October 14, 2025), to be increased on an annual basis. In response to comments regarding the potential for disproportionate economic impact on certain U.S. interests or industries, the following vessels will not be subject to the scope of the fee: (1) U.S. vessels enrolled in certain U.S. Maritime Administration programs; (2) vessels arriving empty or in ballast; (3) smaller vessels; (4) vessels engaged in short sea shipping; (5) U.S.-owned companies' vessels; and (6) specialized export vessels. In making this determination, the U.S. Trade Representative balanced the need to impose a service fee to disincentivize the use and purchase of Chinese-built ships, as a counter to China's dominance, with concerns raised in the comments regarding the effect that such a fee would have on shipping costs and the U.S. economy.

Service Fee on Maritime Transport Operators With Prospective Orders for Chinese Vessels

The U.S. Trade Representative proposed an additional fee on vessel operators based on the percentage of vessels ordered from Chinese shipyards, either escalating based on percentage of vessel orders in or expected to be delivered by Chinese shipyards over the next 24 months, or a flat fee on vessel operators with 25 percent or more vessels ordered by that operator, or expected to be delivered to that operator, are ordered or expected to be delivered by Chinese shipyards over the next 24 months.

Considering the public comments and the advice of the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined not to impose a fee based on prospective orders of Chinese vessels at this time. The U.S. Trade Representative currently considers that the initial fees being implemented in this Notice, along with the proposed tariff actions, may provide sufficient leverage to encourage China to eliminate its acts, polices, and practices, or otherwise mitigate the burden or restriction from China's market dominance.

Service Fee Remission for Maritime Transport via U.S.-Built Vessels

To promote the acquisition and use of U.S.-built ships by operators, the U.S. Trade Representative proposed a service fee remission in the form of a refund on the additional fees charged to an operator providing international maritime transport services in an amount up to $1,000,000, per entry into a U.S. port of a U.S.-built vessel.

A large number of comments, both supporting and opposing the proposed fee remission, highlighted the lack of capacity of U.S. shipbuilders. Several comments opposing the proposal noted that it would take years for operators to take advantage of the refund or that, given the lack of capacity, the proposed remission would be unlikely to provide much benefit. One comment noted that the proposal failed to address underlying capacity constraints.

To address the lack of capacity of U.S. shipbuilders, comments supporting the proposal provided suggestions to broaden the eligibility of the proposed fee remission to more ships. These included allowing fee remission to ships produced in third countries and to ships that are made available to sealift command.

Considering the public comments and the advice of the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined to adjust the proposed service fee remission. The U.S. Trade Representative has determined to allow for suspending the fee on an equivalent size Chinese-built vessel, for a period not to exceed three years, upon order and until delivery of a U.S.-built vessel of equal or greater size within that time period.

To further promote the acquisition of U.S.-built ships, and address capacity constraints, the U.S. Trade Representative has also determined to phase in a service fee on vessel operators of foreign-built vehicle carriers on a non-discriminatory basis.

Restrictions on Services To Promote the Transport of U.S. Goods on U.S. Vessels

The U.S. Trade Representative proposed a restriction on maritime services with escalating requirements over a seven-year period for U.S. operators to increase the percentage of U.S. products on U.S.-flagged ships and the percentage of U.S. products on U.S.-flagged, U.S.-built vessels. The U.S. Trade Representative also proposed that U.S. goods may be approved for export on a non-U.S.-built vessel, provided that 20 percent of what the operator transports by vessel is transported on U.S.-flagged, U.S.-built ships.

In response, several comments expressed concern that the proposals would only punish U.S. exporters. Some asserted that the proposals would lead to a decrease in U.S. exports and would ultimately divert ships from U.S. ports. Several comments noted that the timelines for the proposals are too aggressive and not achievable. Most of these comments noted that there is currently insufficient capacity of U.S. ships and one comment noted a lack of U.S. mariners.

Some comments agreed with the proposals, noting that an escalating percentage of U.S. products to be exported every year on U.S. flagged ships would help curb the use of Chinese built ships, drive demand for domestically produced ships, and provide benefits to upstream domestic industries, including steel. A number of comments supported the proposal, but expressed concern regarding the lack of capacity on U.S. ships. One comment asserted that the U.S. would need at least 15 years to build sufficient capacity.

Considering the public comments and the advice of the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative has determined to limit the scope of the proposed restrictions to U.S. LNG exports, with restrictions on maritime transport of LNG to begin on April 17, 2028, and gradually increasing thereafter for a period in total of 22 years. The U.S. Trade Representative has further determined that an operator or its non-compliant LNG vessel may be licensed to operate for up to three years as if the requirement is met, if that operator orders and takes delivery of a U.S.-built LNG vessel of equivalent or greater capacity within that time period.

Other Actions: Actions To Reduce Exposure to and Risks From LOGINK or Similar Platforms

The U.S. Trade Representative requested comments on other actions to reduce exposure to and risks from China's promotion of the National Transportation and Logistics Public Information Platform (LOGINK) or other similar platforms. In response, some commenters expressed support for U.S. efforts to restrict LOGINK and its access to shipping data or to ban U.S. ports from using LOGINK.

Considering the public comments and the advice of the Section 301 Committee, the U.S. Trade Representative intends to continue to explore responsive actions as to Chinese digital logistics platforms (e.g., LOGINK).

A number of commenters addressed additional issues in response to USTR's narrowly scoped request for comments on "other actions" with respect to LOGINK. USTR took note of these comments, including suggestions that the United States reinvest in or incentivize U.S. shipbuilding and commercial fleets, including through fees being directed to a trust fund to support domestic shipyards, skilled workforce training, technology development, the addition of a land border fee and fee on Chinese-built offshore vessels, and expanding access to U.S. cabotage trade for U.S. stakeholders and European tonnage and shipbrokers.

Response to Legal Arguments Raised in the Comments

Section 301(b) of the Trade Act gives broad authority to the U.S. Trade Representative to take action to obtain the elimination of an unreasonable acts, policies, and practices of foreign country that burden or restrict U.S. commerce. Section 301(b) further provides that actions may be taken that are within the power of the President with respect to trade in any goods or services, or with respect to any other areas of pertinent relations with the foreign country. Section 301(c) further describes specific action the U.S. Trade Representative is authorized to take.

Despite the broad grant of authority in the 301 statute, some comments assert that the proposed actions are ultra vires, otherwise illegal, or unconstitutional. USTR responds to these comments below.

A few comments assert that the proposed actions are inconsistent with World Trade Organization (WTO) rules, and the U.S.-China Agreement on Maritime Transport. With respect to WTO rules, some comments argue that the service fees on Chinese operators and owners and operators of Chinese-built ships are a discriminatory importation charge that is inconsistent with the WTO's multilateral dispute resolution mechanism. USTR notes that Section 301(b) of the Trade Act authorizes the actions proposed in the investigation, which are in response to numerous findings of unreasonable acts, policies, and practices of China that burden or restrict U.S. commerce. Moreover, as detailed in USTR's Report, the myriad of acts, policies and practices deployed by China in pursuit of its goals for global dominance of the maritime and logistics sectors cannot be appropriately addressed through recourse to WTO dispute settlement proceedings.

In response to comments that the proposed actions violate the U.S.-China Agreement on Maritime Transport, USTR notes that the agreement does not contain any provision which would prohibit the U.S. Trade Representative from taking the proposed actions, especially in light of acts, policies, and practices by China which are inconsistent with China's commitment to market principles in shipping and intermodal services.

In response to comments that USTR's proposed service fees imposed on non-Chinese operators are ultra vires, USTR notes that the plain language of section 301(c) of the Trade Act. Section 301(c)(1)(B) authorizes the U.S. Trade Representative to impose restrictions on services of the investigated foreign country, notwithstanding any other provision of law. Section 301(c)(3)(A)-(B) provides additional authority for the U.S. Trade Representative to take action authorized by Section 301(b) against any goods or economic sector, on a nondiscriminatory basis or solely against the foreign country under investigation, and without regard to whether or not such goods or economic sector were involved in the acts, policies or practices that are the subject of the investigation. Together, these provisions authorize services fees to be applied against China as well as on a nondiscriminatory basis.

In response to comments that USTR's proposed restriction to promote the transport of U.S. goods on U.S. ships does not constitute a fee or a duty or a restriction on a service, USTR notes that the proposal to restrict the international maritime transport of certain U.S. goods is, by its very terms, a restriction of a service. USTR does not consider the restriction on services to be taken with respect to any prior service sector authorization because this action creates a new restriction on the provision of maritime transport services.

USTR does not consider that the proposed fees contravene the Export Clause of the U.S. Constitution, nor does USTR consider the fees to be sufficiently closely related to the export process. The proposed fees are fees on maritime transport services payable upon entrance of a covered vessel at arrival at a port in the customs territory of the United States from a foreign destination, rather than on export from a state of the United States.

USTR disagrees with novel arguments that the proposed actions may amount to a regulatory taking without just compensation or that the proposed actions are unconstitutional under the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment. Assuming for the sake of response that a service fee could provide a basis for a constitutional takings claim, the fee structure in the final actions has been recalibrated in response to public comments in order to diminish severe adverse economic impacts on U.S. industries. The fees also reflect an amount that would be sufficiently meaningful to change commercial behavior and potential market responses. Coupled with the limited scope of the fees and extended lead times, USTR finds no basis for an assertion of an unconstitutional takings claim. USTR considers that the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment would be inapplicable to USTR's proposed actions as service fees or restrictions are not themselves fines or penalties.

D. Proposed Action

In accordance with the President's direction, the U.S. Trade Representative has considered whether to propose additional duties on certain ship-to-shore cranes and other cargo handling equipment. The U.S. Trade Representative has determined that it is appropriate to do so considering, as discussed in USTR's Report, China's overwhelming production share of ship-to-shore cranes, intermodal chassis, and shipping containers, and China's increasing shares of other components and products.

Specifically, the Report issued by USTR in this investigation highlights the vulnerabilities arising from over-reliance on Chinese production of ship-to-shore cranes and other maritime components and equipment, noting that such over-reliance may create opportunities for China to manipulate the supply of critical components or materials essential to U.S. maritime infrastructure. USTR's report highlights that China's targeting of the maritime sectors for dominance has severely undercut competition, leading to China overwhelming controlling global production of STS cranes, intermodal chassis, and shipping containers, among others. Consistent with the President's direction in Executive Order 14269, the U.S. Trade Representative finds that proposing 301 duties on these products is an additional and appropriate source of leverage to encourage China to eliminate the investigated acts policies and practices.

The U.S. Trade Representative has determined to propose the following:

Additional duties of up to 100 percent on STS cranes manufactured, assembled, or made using components of Chinese origin, or manufactured anywhere in the world by a company owned, controlled, or substantially influenced by a Chinese national, and

Additional duties of up to 100 percent on certain cargo handling equipment of China.

In order to give effect to the President's direction, the U.S. Trade Representative proposes that action with the respect to STS cranes be taken on a non-discriminatory basis.

The U.S. Trade representative will continue to monitor the effects of the trade action and the progress made toward resolution of this matter. Additionally, the U.S. Trade Representative will continue to consider the proposed actions and possible actions, including actions to address LOGINK and fees on Chinese-built off-shore vessels. In considering possible modifications, the U.S. Trade Representative will also consider the progress of policies under Executive Order 14269 (Restoring America's Maritime Dominance), including coordination with allies and partners regarding the actions taken in this investigation and efforts to reduce dependencies on adversaries through capital investments in U.S. shipbuilding and the establishment of a reliable funding source for programs under the Maritime Action Plan. If modification to the action may be appropriate, the U.S. Trade Representative will consider the comments received in response to the February 27 notice. discriminatory and burdens or restricts United States commerce, the U.S. Trade Representative shall determine what action, if any, to take under section 301(b). These matters will be addressed in subsequent proceedings.

January 23, 2025