I think at the beginning it is appropriate to 
take a minute and remind ourselves that, with all our pressing 
problems, we have a very successful economy. Under President 
Trump's leadership we are growing much faster than any other G7 
nation. We have created millions of new jobs, significantly the 
500,000 manufacturing jobs, and we have seen 2 million people 
join the workforce. These are people who were not in it before.
    These are real working people moving from despair to hope, 
and their kids from insecurity to a future. A lot needs to be 
done, and I salute all Members of the--of both parties--who are 
working so diligently on issues of worker training, opiate 
addiction, as well as trade and other issues.
    But we are here to talk about China. I agree with those who 
see our large and growing trade deficit and their unfair trade 
practices, including technology transfer issues, failure to 
protect intellectual property, large subsidies, cyber theft of 
commercial secrets, and other problems as major threats to our 
economy.
    We can compete with anyone in the world, but we must have 
rules, enforced rules, that make sure market outcomes, not 
state capitalism and technology theft, determine winners.
    President Trump has, for years, recognized this very 
serious and, I would say, existential problem. And he is 
determined to take action to defend our workers, farmers, and 
ranchers, and our economic system. He directed me to conduct a 
study under Section 301. After months of hard work the 
President ordered that certain tariffs be put in place. Because 
of his insight and grit, we are in a position to deal with this 
problem for the first time after decades of governmental 
inaction.
    I would like to note that, as with many extremely important 
issues facing our country, prescience has been bipartisan. The 
Speaker was an early, forceful, and foresighted leader on this 
issue. I have admired her perception and hard work over the 
years, and have counseled with her regularly in my current 
position.
    I would just like to read something briefly. Faced with the 
PNTR vote in April of 2000, the Speaker said, ``It is incumbent 
upon all of us in the public and private sectors to work for 
free and open trade with China that is real. The U.S.-China 
bilateral WTO agreement, however, is seriously deficient in 
substance, implementation, and enforcement. This issue is too 
important for our economy to be based on a pattern of broken 
promises, not proven performance. China can become a member of 
the WTO without Congress having to surrender its right to U.S.-
China trade review annually. There is no reason why we should 
permanently surrender that leverage at this time.'' I ask, if 
her position had prevailed, how different would things be right 
now?
    There are many other examples of bipartisan leadership, 
including a lot of people on this Committee, and I am going to 
get into--I am going to answer the question, if it is relevant.
    Let me close by saying that we have engaged in a very 
intense, extremely serious, and very specific negotiation with 
China on crucial structural issues for several months now. We 
are making real progress. If we can complete this effort--and 
again, I say if--and can reach a satisfactory solution to the 
all-important outstanding issue of enforceability, as well as 
some other concerns, we might be able to have an agreement that 
helps us turn the corner in our economic relationship with 
China.
    Let me be clear: Much still needs to be done both before an 
agreement is reached and, more importantly, after it is 
reached, if one is reached.
    I want to thank all Members for your bipartisan approach on 
this seminal effort, and I look forward to continuing our work 
together. I want to say that if this was not a bipartisan view, 
we would not be having the success that we are having.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member. I look 
forward to your questions.

Mr. Chairman Neal, Ranking Member Brady, and all the
distinguished Members of this great committee: thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning.
The Committee is meeting at a historic moment for those of us
interested in U.S. trade policy. Under President Trump’s leadership,
Americans are benefiting from the strongest economy in the developed
world. Over the last year, the U.S. economy has grown at an annual rate
of roughly 3 percent – significantly better than that of any other G-7
country. Our unemployment rate is 4 percent. Inflation is very low.
These are great times for American workers.
Americans who trade are benefiting from this growth. Through the
first 11 months of 2018, total U.S. exports of goods and services were up
7.3 percent from the same period in 2017, and up 13.7 percent from the
same period in 2016. We’ve seen similar percentage increases on the
import side. Last year, the United States created 264,000 new
manufacturing jobs – the highest such figure in 21 years.

We have new trade agreements with South Korea, Mexico, and
Canada. We are working with you on talks with Japan, the European
Union, and the United Kingdom. We are aggressively enforcing U.S.
trade laws. All of these efforts have one purpose: to build a higher
standard of living for all Americans. I am happy to report that our
efforts are working.
Of course, no challenge in the trade space is greater than that
presented by China.
In 2000, the year before China joined the WTO, our trade deficit in
goods with them was $83 billion. Last year, through November, it
was on pace to exceed $417 billion.
In 2000, the year before China joined the WTO, there were 17.3
million manufacturing jobs in the United States. By 2016, 5
million of those jobs were lost.
Last month, USTR issued its annual report on China’s compliance
with its WTO obligations. We concluded that “China’s actions
have done severe harm to other WTO members and the multilateral
3
trading system, which was never designed to deal with a nonmarket economy of China’s size.”
Last March, USTR issued the results of a detailed investigation
into China’s policies regarding intellectual property, technology
transfer, and innovation. We found that China had engaged in
numerous unfair practices – including forced technology transfer
and cybertheft. In a supplemental report last November, we found
that China had not changed its ways.
Together, these reports represent nearly 500 pages of detailed,
thorough analysis of the systemic and structural problems in the
Chinese economy that are hurting U.S. workers and businesses.
These facts – and many others of which Members are already aware –
raise a very difficult question: How should the United States deal with a
country like China, which is the world’s second largest economy – and
which continues to operate under a market-distorting system? In the
whole history of U.S. trade policy, I am not aware of another country
that has presented such a severe challenge to American policymakers.
In retrospect, we should have taken this question more seriously when China’s economy was much smaller. But we did not, and now this
Administration – and you – must deal with the result.
Fortunately, in President Trump, we have a leader in the White
House who recognizes the importance of the China challenge – and who
has empowered his Administration to take firm and unprecedented
actions in response. I am also encouraged by the strong bipartisan
support we have received from Members who recognize the gravity of
the issues before us. Speaker Pelosi has long been a leader on this issue
– as long ago as 2000, she wisely warned about the dangers of granting
permanent normal trade relations to China. I regularly confer with
Chairman Neal, Ranking Member Brady, and now Chairman
Blumenauer and Representative Buchanan and many other members of
this Committee – and I have been greatly aided by their wisdom and
support.
I want to emphasize that Congress has been extremely helpful in
our recent talks with China. The Chinese government is very aware of
the strong desire for structural change – and enforcement – found on both sides of the aisle. And your support has been critical in persuading
China to take our concerns more seriously.
As you know, we have had near-constant negotiations with China
in recent months. Both sides are seriously engaged at the highest level –
and significant progress has been made. While it is too early to predict
the outcome, I want to emphasize two key points:
First, this Administration is pressing for significant structural
changes that would allow for a more level playing field – especially
when it comes to issues of intellectual property rights and technology
transfers. The issues on the table are too serious to be resolved with
promises of additional purchases. We need new rules.
Second, any agreement must be enforceable. We at USTR are
very aware of the history of our trading relationship with China, and the
disappointments that have resulted from promises that were not kept.
Thus, the Administration is focused on making sure that we have the
ability to enforce any new agreement.
Again, I am happy to discuss these issues with you. I look forward
to your questions