Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the committee, I 
wanted to start off by saying I have missed seeing you, but I 
cannot see most of you in any event. I cannot probably 
accurately say that. I have Senator Young, whom I can actually 
see, in this room. This is, for me at least, an unusual 
experience. But I am assuming you are out there.
    We have been going through two crises recently, and these 
indeed are challenging times. I will not go through all the 
history of it, but I want to say that I am confident, working 
together in good faith, we can all help to heal the wounds in 
this Nation. And I certainly, as the USTR, want to play my 
part.
    In some ways, the problems we have been facing recently 
make talking about international trade seem less important, but 
in other ways, perhaps, rebuilding our economy and helping to 
create good-paying jobs for all Americans, securing fairness 
for our businesses, and bringing back manufacturing can be some 
part of the solution.
    We have been isolated and quarantined for so long, I fear 
that we might have forgotten what great achievements we had 
during the early part of this year--all of us together. 
Republicans and Democrats, House and Senate, worked closely 
with the administration to write and pass the biggest, and I 
would say the best trade agreement in American history--USMCA.
    I would like to again thank you for working with me and my 
team to achieve this historic accomplishment. I would also like 
to thank you for your support and help as we worked our way to 
the China Phase One agreement, a very important U.S.-Japan 
agreement, and numerous other small agreements during this last 
year. Together, I think we have helped American workers, 
businesses, farmers, and ranchers. Going forward, there is much 
to achieve. As you all know, we have an active FTA negotiation 
with the United Kingdom. We also will very soon, in the next 
couple of weeks, commence talks with Kenya.
    Finally, we have active engagements on trade issues with 
numerous other countries, and of course I look forward to 
working with all members on the crucial issue of WTO reform.
    Thank you to all the members for working so closely with 
me, for making time to talk and to meet with me, for having 
your staffs--which is so crucial to this process--work so 
closely with USTR, and for making our end product consistently 
better as a result of your work and your staffs' work.
    So that is my statement. But I will just continue for a 
second, because Senator Wyden was so kind as to bring up what, 
I agree with the President, is the greatest trade agreement.
    So we start off with the proposition that China is a very, 
very big problem. We move to the next step of the logic, which 
is that every administration before the President did nothing--
absolutely nothing. The problem got worse. None of them did 
anything.
    I am sitting here thinking I feel a little bit like what 
Roosevelt would have felt like if Hoover came forward and said, 
``I want to talk to you about depressions,'' or if Chamberlain 
had talked to Churchill about German policy. The reality is, 
nobody did anything.
    There was this great agreement on cybersecurity that the 
Obama administration did with China. I went and I said, ``Show 
me the agreement.'' There is no agreement. It was two press 
releases that were not even coordinated. There was no 
agreement. It was nothing.
    So we have now a written agreement. I have it right here. 
It covers more than just purchases. It covers IP, tech 
transfer, financial services, currency--it covers enormous 
amounts of ag SPS issues. And China is, for the most part, 
doing what they said they were going to do.
    And in addition, it contains $370 billion worth of tariffs 
on China. So to compare this to anything that was done before 
is just totally unfair. And this business about the purchases, 
which we get from the Peterson Institute, just so we 
understand, these are exports, many of which were booked months 
in advance.
    Everybody who knows agriculture knows if you look at what 
was shipped in March, it was not bought in March. It was bought 
weeks and weeks before that. So those numbers really are not 
telling.
    I am happy, as questions come, to go through the numbers 
with members. So with my staid opening comment and then my 
slightly less staid reaction to my good friend Senator Wyden, I 
will now stop talking.

Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the 
committee, it is a pleasure to appear before you today to testify on 
the President's 2020 trade agenda.

    By placing trade at the center of his agenda in 2019, the President 
achieved more trade successes over the last year than most 
administrations achieve over multiple terms. And while the coronavirus 
has negatively affected the economy in recent months, the benefits of 
the President's trade and economic policies were unmistakable prior to 
the onset of the pandemic. Wages were growing faster for nearly all 
groups, especially those at the lower end of the income scale. Since 
President Trump took office, average wage growth for Americans without 
a bachelor's degree has outpaced wage growth for those with a 
bachelor's degree or higher. Average wage growth for individuals at the 
10th percentile of the income distribution has outpaced wage growth for 
individuals at the 90th percentile. Wealth inequality also declined, as 
the share of net worth held by the bottom 50 percent of households 
increased, while the share held by the top 1 percent decreased.

    Net worth for the bottom 50 percent of households increased at an 
annual rate 15 times higher than the average growth seen under the 
three prior administrations' expansion periods. Average wage growth for 
African Americans and Hispanics has outpaced overall average wage 
growth. At more than $66,000, real median household income hit the 
highest level ever recorded. 15,000 manufacturing jobs were lost in the 
12 months prior to President Trump's election, but more than 500,000 
manufacturing jobs were added to the American economy from November 
2016 to January 2020. This contributed to unemployment reaching 
historic lows in 2019, with job openings exceeding people looking for 
work by more than 1 million.

    These figures represent a blue-collar boom under the Trump 
administration, a boom that will continue as we reopen our economy and 
establish a path forward that better protects our economic security.

    President Trump promised to make fundamental changes to U.S. trade 
policy to achieve results that benefit all Americans, and the President 
has kept that promise. The President directly confronted China's 
abusive trade practices through substantial tariffs, resulting in the 
groundbreaking Phase One trade agreement signed on January 15th of this 
year. The agreement secured enforceable commitments from China to cease 
its abusive trade practices--including intellectual property theft, 
forced technology transfer, discriminatory regulations, and currency 
manipulation. It also committed China to significantly increase its 
purchases of U.S. goods and services by at least $200 billion over 2017 
purchase levels.

    By establishing a strong dispute resolution system and maintaining 
tariffs on approximately $370 billion in goods from China, the 
administration has maintained the authority and leverage to enforce 
China's compliance with the agreement while pursuing additional reforms 
under a future Phase Two agreement.

    On January 29th of this year, President Trump signed the United 
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement into law after Congress overwhelmingly 
approved the deal by a vote of 89-10 in the Senate and 385-41 in the 
House of Representatives. The landmark agreement fulfilled the 
President's promise to rebalance the U.S. trade relationship with 
Mexico and Canada while incentivizing manufacturing in the United 
States, defending our competitive advantage in technology and 
innovation, protecting workers and the environment, and securing even 
greater market access for America's businesses, farmers, and ranchers. 
USMCA was a bipartisan victory for the American people, and I would 
like to thank all of the members who contributed so much to the 
negotiations and implementing bill.

    Last year, the United States also entered into two agreements with 
Japan that established preferred or zero-rate tariffs on more than 90 
percent of U.S. food and agricultural products imported into Japan and 
enhanced the existing $40 billion in digital trade between our 
countries.

    In addition to new trade agreements, the administration has 
continued to seek strong and effective enforcement of our existing 
trade agreements and the WTO commitments of our trade partners. Last 
year, the United States won the largest award in WTO history, obtaining 
the right to impose countermeasures on $7.5 billion of goods from the 
European Union in response to the harms caused by EU Airbus subsidies. 
The U.S. also secured increased access to the EU's beef market after 
successfully challenging a non-science-based ban on certain hormones.

    In addition, the United States initiated action against France for 
its ``digital services tax,'' which targeted American technology 
companies. This action resulted in an agreement to suspend collection 
of the tax while OECD countries discuss a fairer and more standardized 
approach. USTR is continuing to analyze similar measures worldwide, and 
recently initiated section 301 investigations of digital services taxes 
in ten additional countries.

    Furthermore, the United States has successfully challenged 
distortive Chinese agricultural trade practices; Indian export 
subsidies for steel, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, information technology 
products, and textiles; and retaliatory tariffs unfairly levied by five 
countries in response to the President's steel and aluminum tariffs.

    Lastly, the United States has engaged extensively with WTO members 
on a range of issues. After years of complaints by multiple 
administrations, the Trump administration took action against WTO 
Appellate Body abuses by exercising our right to not approve new 
members. This action has forced the WTO to engage in a long-overdue 
debate about the role of the Appellate Body.

    Alongside this action, USTR issued its report on the Appellate 
Body, which details how the body frequently fails to apply WTO rules as 
agreed to by WTO members, imposing new obligations and violating 
members' rights. The United States also offered a proposal to establish 
consequences for non-compliance with WTO notification obligations, as 
well as a proposed General Council decision that would establish 
objective criteria for determining which WTO members should qualify for 
blanket ``special and differential treatment.''
                          trade policy agenda
    This year, President Trump will continue to pursue new trade 
agreements that benefit all Americans, aggressively enforce our trade 
laws, respond to unfair trade practices by other nations, and work 
toward reform at the World Trade Organization.

    The Trump administration has taken numerous steps to pave the way 
for negotiating a trade agreement with the UK, including a review of 
public comments, a public hearing, and extensive consultations with 
congressional and trade advisory committees. USTR published detailed 
negotiating objectives on February 28, 2019, and aims to reach an 
agreement with substantive results for U.S. consumers, businesses, 
farmers, ranchers, and workers as soon as possible.

    On February 6, 2020, President Trump announced that the United 
States intends to initiate trade agreement negotiations with the 
Republic of Kenya. This action falls in line with Congress's support 
for mutually beneficial trade agreements with the countries of sub-
Saharan Africa. A trade agreement between the United States and Kenya 
will complement Africa's regional integration efforts, including the 
landmark African Continental Free Trade Area. Such an agreement will 
also serve as a model for additional agreements in Africa, expanding 
U.S.-Africa trade and investment across a continent that will account 
for nearly a fifth of the world's consumers by 2030.

    The United States also seeks to rebalance our trade relationship 
with the European Union. For many years, U.S. businesses have been at a 
disadvantage in doing business in the EU. Both tariff and non-tariff 
barriers in the EU have led to increasing and unsustainable trade 
deficits with the EU--reaching $179 billion in 2019. With recent 
changes in EU leadership, the United States is hopeful for more 
progress in the coming year.

    The United States also seeks to build on the accomplishments of the 
past year and work toward more comprehensive agreements with Japan and 
China that promote fairer and more reciprocal trade. In the case of 
Japan, the two countries intend to enter into further negotiations on 
customs duties, barriers to trade in services and investment, and other 
trade restrictions. With China, ``Phase Two'' will focus on issues of 
overcapacity, subsidization, disciplines on China's state-owned 
enterprises, and cyber-theft.

    More broadly, the Trump administration will continue to 
aggressively enforce U.S. trade laws to protect the interests of 
American businesses and workers, taking strong actions to ensure 
America's trade partners comply with the terms of our trade agreements. 
The Phase One agreement with China established a strong process for 
ensuring that China honors its commitments and imposing proportionate 
measures if it fails to do so. Likewise, the USMCA contains a detailed 
process for enforcing commitments, and the President has established 
working groups to monitor the implementation and maintenance of the 
labor and environmental provisions.

    USTR will also pursue formal challenges to acts, policies, or 
practices of foreign governments that are inconsistent with WTO rules 
and other recognized standards. For example, USTR is investigating the 
digital services taxes of ten additional countries, as mentioned above. 
USTR has also launched eight GSP reviews under this administration, 
ensuring that countries enjoying favorable tariff rates in the United 
States follow the clear labor, IP, and market access standards 
necessary to qualify for the program.

    The administration will also look for ways to strengthen our 
existing trade policies to better protect American producers and 
consumers. One option is to tighten de minimis thresholds for American 
imports, including those subject to section 301 tariffs. At $800, the 
U.S. de minimis threshold far exceeds that of our major trade partners. 
For example, the EU threshold is only $150, while China's stands at a 
mere $7. This results in massive numbers of shipments to the U.S. 
receiving duty-free treatment and virtually no screening. In FY 2018 
and FY 2019, there were a combined 1.2 billion de minimis shipments, 
with 719 million (or roughly 60 percent) coming from China. In 
contrast, the U.S. received only 68 million formal entries during this 
period, with only 7.3 million (or less than 11 percent) coming from 
China. The disproportionately high volume of these shipments indicates 
China and others are likely exploiting the high U.S. de minimis 
threshold to avoid paying duties.

    Lastly, the United States will continue to pursue reforms at the 
WTO aimed at limiting the organization to its original role as a forum 
for nations to negotiate trade agreements, monitor compliance, and 
facilitate trade dispute resolutions. At present, over 150 disputes 
have been filed against the United States at the WTO, while no other 
member has faced even 100. Worse, up to 90 percent of these disputes 
have resulted in a report finding the U.S. at least partially at fault. 
This averages out to five or six successful WTO disputes against the 
United States every year.

    In other words, the WTO has effectively treated one of the world's 
freest and most open economies--with an enormous trade deficit--as the 
world's greatest trade abuser. In so doing, the WTO's Appellate Body 
has often created new obligations out of thin air, preventing the 
United States from taking action to address unfair trade practices that 
hurt U.S. workers, and usurping the U.S. government's accountability to 
the American people. This situation has also greatly undermined the 
negotiating process at the WTO, as countries now believe they can 
obtain better outcomes through litigation than through negotiation, 
especially with the United States.

    In addition to reigning in the Appellate Body, the United States 
will also seek a broader reset at the WTO. Currently, outdated tariff 
determinations are locked in place that no longer reflect members' 
policy choices and economic conditions. As a result, many countries 
with large and developed economies maintain very high bound tariff 
rates, far above those levied by the United States. The United States 
must ensure that tariffs reflect current economic realities to protect 
our exporters and workers. To that end, the United States will also 
seek broader support for our proposals concerning notification 
enforcement and ``special and differential treatment'' for developing 
countries.

    The President's trade agenda has benefited all Americans, but 
especially those most harmed by the failed policies of the last 25 
years. In the decades following the North American Free Trade 
Agreement's (NAFTA) implementation and China's accession to the WTO, 
America lost one in four manufacturing jobs and more than 60,000 
American factories were shut down. Over the last 3\1/2\ years, that 
trend has finally started to reverse. President Trump promised to end 
the disastrous trade deals of the past and put America's workers, 
farmers, ranchers, and businesses first. He has delivered--and will 
continue to deliver--on that promise.
