Mr. FREEMAN. Thank you, Chairman Thomas and Members of the 
Committee. I do appreciate the opportunity to testify today on 
issues surrounding U.S.-China trade. I have submitted prepared 
testimony but would like to summarize that and offer a few 
thoughts on the key issues affecting bilateral U.S.-China 
trade. Obviously with concerns raised by Congressman Sanders 
and others about our trade deficit with China and the other 
issues that are inherent in this complex a relationship as that 
which we have with China, a number of very positive economic 
considerations to that relationship can be overlooked. This is 
especially true as we review the years since China joined the 
WTO on December 11, 2001.
    We should not forget in approving China's accession to WTO, 
the United States did not make any specific new concessions to 
China other than to agree to accord China the same treatment it 
accords the other 146 members of the WTO. In contrast, China 
committed to make dramatic changes to its trade regime and to 
open its market significantly to U.S. manufactured goods, 
agricultural commodities and services. As a result, and as 
discussed by my colleague from CEA, U.S. exports to China have 
increased dramatically to $35 billion in 2004, close to double 
the total for 2001. From 2001 to 2004 U.S. exports to China 
increased eight times faster than U.S. exports to the rest of 
the world. As a result, China rose from our ninth largest 
export market in 2001 to become our fifth largest export market 
in 2004. China is more welcoming of imports than some of our 
other trading partners in the region, especially given this 
stage in its development. China is certainly a major exporting 
power. It is the world's third biggest now, but it is also the 
third biggest importing economy.
    Our focus at USTR, therefore, is ensuring that U.S. 
exporters of manufactured goods, agricultural commodities and 
services have unimpeded access to China's market and that 
Chinese trade practices do not otherwise unfairly disadvantage 
U.S. producers. The emphasis in this work has been to focus on 
resolving problems in a way that delivers results as 
expeditiously as possible for America. With that in mind the 
Administration has had a comprehensive engagement with China 
that has over the course of the past few years resulted in 
solutions to trade concerns that have enabled billions of 
dollars of goods and services to reach China's markets. In late 
2003 President Bush and Chinese Premier Wen Jiaboa constructed 
a problem-solving dialogs that resulted in the resolution of 7 
potential WTO cases against China in 2004 and paved the way for 
a resolution of the first ever and only WTO case filed against 
China by any WTO member on China's tax treatment of imported 
semiconductors.
    We clearly continue to have our work cut out for us and 
there are a number of critical trade issues with China that we 
will face over the months and years to come. Intellectual 
property rights infringement is obviously at the top of our 
priority list with respect to China. We have initiated a 
comprehensive strategic effort to deal with the problem of IPR 
infringing exports from China. We are reviewing the consistency 
of China's IPR regime with WTO requirements and we are working 
to improve the capacity for IPR enforcement in China. Later 
this month the Administration will complete an out of cycle 
review of China's IPR regime under Special 301 of the Trade Act 
1974, and we look forward to working with Congress and industry 
to address the results of that review. With the end of the 
textile quota system on January 1st of this year we clearly 
face a dramatic shift in textile and apparel trade patterns 
that has already been of profound benefit to China. The scale 
of China's textile production and the fact that China was not a 
member of the WTO when the agreement on textiles and clothing 
was established in 1995 is one of the main reasons we 
negotiated the special textile safeguard as part of China's WTO 
accession agreement during the previous Administration.
    As you know we exercised that safeguard a number of times 
in 2003, and recently, following the rise of textile imports 
earlier this year, the Administration self-initiated safeguard 
investigations in to imports of three categories of apparel 
from China. In addition to these issues and apart from issues 
with which other agencies, including Department of the Treasury 
and Labor, are seized, the Administration is working hard 
across the board to encourage greater market access for our 
agriculture producers, intellectual property rights holders, 
service providers and manufacturers. We have an ongoing dialog 
with our Chinese counterparts to improve access for U.S. 
agriculture into China which is already a very significant 
market for our farmers, to reduce barriers to trade in services 
in which enjoy a healthy surplus with China, ensure the ability 
of our exporters to distribute goods easily in China, do away 
with industrial and tax policies, standards and other measures 
that encourage Chinese enterprises to develop at the expense of 
our exporters, and ultimately and finally, improve China's 
regulatory transparency.
    We are making good headway, but continuing on this path 
requires constant vigilance and the attention of Congress and 
senior officials across the range of departments. Your 
continued leadership and support on these issues and constant 
encouragement of both the Administration and the Chinese 
government to make sure that this is a trade relationship that 
works for American interests is critical. We look forward to 
continuing our production relationship with your offices, and I 
look forward to your questions. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Freeman follows:]
       Statement of Charles W. Freeman III, Assistant U.S. Trade 
       Representative of China Affairs, Office of the U.S. Trade 
                             Representative
Introduction
    Chairman Thomas, Congressmen Rangel and Members of the Ways and 
Means Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on 
issues surrounding the U.S.-China trade relationship and, in 
particular, the Administration's efforts in ensuring that China 
fulfills the commitments that it made upon joining the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). This is a subject of considerable importance and a 
matter of great priority for the Administration and the Office of the 
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), in our capacity as the lead agency 
with responsibility for U.S. trade policy.
    Clearly, China's economic emergence presents both challenges and 
opportunities for U.S. manufacturers, farmers, service providers and 
workers. While there is much positive to say about our success in 
penetrating the Chinese market, there is understandable concern that 
certain Chinese trade practices have frustrated efforts to further open 
the market, or have in other ways contributed to our large and growing 
trade deficit with China.
    There are several areas where we have problems with China's trade 
practices, and this Administration is working vigorously to address 
those, using the most effective tools at our disposal, including our 
trade remedy laws.
    Let me first put in context the concerns about our trade 
relationship with China:

      When China joined the WTO in December 2001, the United 
States did not make any specific new concessions to China, other than 
to agree to accord China the same treatment it accords the other 146 
members of the WTO. In contrast, China committed to make dramatic 
changes to its trade regime and to open its market significantly to 
U.S. manufactured goods and services.
      U.S. exports to China have increased dramatically since 
China joined the WTO in 2001. U.S. exports to China totaled $35 billion 
in 2004, close to double the total for 2001. In fact, from 2001 to 
2004, U.S. exports to China increased nearly eight times faster than 
U.S. exports to the rest of the world. As a result, China rose from our 
ninth largest export market in 2001 to our fifth largest export market 
in 2004.
      In the past four years, the Administration has taken 
aggressive action to help facilitate this export growth, using a 
variety of diplomatic, legal and other tools to bring real results in 
our trade relationship. In 2004, we used high-level dialogue and trade 
diplomacy to resolve seven potential WTO disputes with China, and we 
were the first (and still only) WTO member to file a dispute settlement 
case against China at the WTO.
      In part as a result of these efforts, the American 
Chamber of Commerce opined in September 2004 that, ``[w]ith the 
exception of intellectual property rights, we believe China is 
substantially in compliance with its WTO deadlines and specific 
obligations.'' That is an optimistic opinion in some respects, but it 
does reflect the significant progress China and the United States have 
made in the years since China's WTO accession.
      Our trade deficit with China is driven by many factors, 
including the strong growth of our economy and our expanding ability to 
buy and consume large amounts of imports.
      A large portion of the recent increase in our trade 
deficit with China represents a shift in trading patterns, particularly 
in Asia, and has come at the expense of other countries. That is, much 
of the import growth from China is displacing imports from other 
countries rather than U.S. production.
      With respect to our trade remedy laws, the United States 
was the first WTO member to invoke the China-specific textile safeguard 
to address market disruption caused by a surge in Chinese imports, and 
has just self-initiated investigations to consider limits on additional 
categories. We have also continued to apply our anti-dumping laws with 
respect to unfairly traded imports from China and make use of special 
non-market economy methodologies in assessing dumping margins.

    With this background, let me give some more detail about China's 
implementation of its WTO commitments and the Administration's efforts 
to ensure an open and level playing field for our manufacturers, 
service suppliers, farmers and workers.
China's WTO Compliance
    In its accession agreement to the WTO, China agreed to extensive, 
far-reaching and often complex commitments to change its trade regime, 
at all levels of government. China committed to implement a set of 
sweeping reforms that required it to lower trade barriers in virtually 
every sector of the economy, to provide national treatment and improved 
market access to goods and services imported from the United States and 
other WTO members, and to protect intellectual property rights (IPR). 
China also agreed to special rules regarding subsidies and the 
operation of state-owned enterprises, in light of the state's large 
role in China's economy. In accepting China as a fellow WTO member, the 
United States also secured a number of significant concessions from 
China that protect U.S. interests during China's WTO implementation 
stage. Implementation should be substantially completed--if China fully 
adheres to the agreed schedule--by December 11, 2007.
    To date, while China's efforts to fulfill its WTO commitments are 
impressive, they are far from complete. At times, China's efforts have 
been unsatisfactory, and the Administration has responded with 
appropriate steps in such cases. The first year of China's WTO 
membership (2002) saw significant progress, as China took steps to 
repeal, revise or enact more than one thousand laws, regulations and 
other measures to bring its trading system into compliance with WTO 
standards. In 2003, however, China's WTO implementation efforts lost 
momentum, and we identified numerous specific WTO-related problems.
    In response, the Administration stepped up its efforts to engage 
China's senior leaders. In December 2003, President Bush and China's 
Premier, Wen Jiabao, committed to upgrade the level of economic 
interaction and to undertake an intensive program of bilateral 
interaction with a view to resolving problems in the U.S.-China trade 
relationship. Premier Wen also committed to facilitate the increase of 
U.S. exports to China. This new approach was exemplified by the highly 
constructive Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) meeting in 
April 2004, with Vice Premier Wu Yi chairing the Chinese side and 
Secretary of Commerce Evans and United States Trade Representative 
Zoellick chairing the U.S. side. At that meeting, which followed a 
series of frank exchanges covering a wide range of issues in late 2003 
and early 2004, the two sides achieved the resolution of no fewer than 
seven potential disputes over China's WTO compliance. Those successes 
ranged across the economic spectrum, from wireless standards to 
biotechnology to trading rights and distribution services.
    At the same time, when our discussions with China were not 
successful, we did not hesitate to use the full range of tools made 
available to us as a result of China's WTO accession. The United States 
filed, and was able to successfully resolve, the first-ever dispute 
settlement case brought against China at the WTO. In that case, the 
United States, with support from four other WTO members, challenged 
discriminatory value-added tax policies that favored Chinese-produced 
semiconductors over imported semiconductors. In July 2004, about three 
months after the United States had initiated the case, China agreed to 
end its discriminatory policies, allowing U.S. manufacturers to 
preserve and expand their $2 billion export business to China.
    Our trade relationship with China is large and growing, so it is 
not surprising that despite successes in a number of areas, some 
problems still remain and new ones have emerged. Of key concern, for 
example, is that China's implementation of its WTO commitments has 
lagged in areas in which the United States has a competitive advantage, 
particularly where innovation or technology plays a key role. At 
present, we are pressing China in the following priority areas:

      The Administration places the highest priority on 
improving the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR) in 
China. Counterfeiting and piracy in China are at record levels and are 
hurting a wide range of U.S. businesses. While China has recently taken 
a number of steps at the national level to address this situation, such 
as lowering the value thresholds that trigger criminal investigations 
and prosecutions, so far these steps have not translated into actual 
reduced infringement at the provincial and municipal levels. The 
Administration is currently conducting a China-specific out-of-cycle 
review under the Special 301 provisions of U.S. trade law and will take 
appropriate action at the conclusion of that review to ensure that 
China develops and implements an effective system for IPR enforcement, 
as required by the WTO's Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights.
      Supplementing these bilateral IPR efforts, the 
Administration has taken comprehensive action to block trade around the 
world in counterfeit and pirated goods through the Strategy Targeting 
Organized Piracy (STOP!), a U.S. government-wide initiative begun in 
October 2004 to empower U.S. businesses to secure and enforce their 
intellectual property rights in overseas markets, to stop fakes at U.S. 
borders, to expose international counterfeiters and pirates, to keep 
global supply chains free of infringing goods, to dismantle criminal 
enterprises that steal U.S. intellectual property and to reach out to 
like-minded U.S. trading partners in order to build an international 
coalition to stop counterfeiting and piracy worldwide.
      While China has implemented its commitment to allow 
companies and individuals to import goods into China directly without 
having to use a middleman, our companies are not faring as well when it 
comes to selling those same products at the wholesale and retail level 
in China. China did issue regulations calling for timely implementation 
of its WTO commitment to open up wholesaling and retailing to foreign 
companies by December 2004. However, U.S. and other foreign companies 
have encountered impediments to actually providing these services 
because of ambiguities in the application of these regulations, as well 
as related licensing procedures. The Administration has been pressing 
the Chinese authorities to clarify these procedures so that our 
companies can take advantage of the rights that they have in the 
wholesaling and retailing areas. Meanwhile, one segment of the 
distribution services sector--direct selling--is causing particular 
concern. Not only has China failed to implement timely regulations, but 
China is also considering restrictions that would make it difficult or 
impossible for U.S. direct selling companies to operate in China. The 
Administration has made clear its serious concerns in this area.
      Since acceding to the WTO, China has periodically 
resorted to policies that limit market access by non-Chinese origin 
goods and that aim to extract technology and intellectual property from 
foreign rights-holders. The objective of these policies seems to be to 
support the development of Chinese industries that are higher up the 
economic value chain than the industries that make up China's current 
labor-intensive base, or simply to protect less-competitive domestic 
industries. Of particular concern is China's recent proposal to 
implement restrictive government procurement policies for software, 
which will not only hurt U.S. interests but also undermine China's 
efforts to develop its software industry. The United States and China 
made important progress toward resolving conflicts over a number of 
these industrial policies in 2004 (for instance, China's proposed use 
of a unique, mandatory Chinese standards for wireless encryption), but 
more work needs to be done, and the advent of new or similar policies 
in the future will require continued vigilance.
      While the United States enjoys a substantial surplus in 
trade in services with China, and the market for U.S. service providers 
in China is increasingly promising, problems remain in a number of 
important service sectors. Through an opaque regulatory process, overly 
burdensome licensing and operating requirements, and other means, 
Chinese regulatory authorities continue to frustrate efforts of U.S. 
providers of insurance, express delivery, telecommunications and other 
services to achieve their full market potential in China.
      With U.S. agricultural exports totaling $5.5 billion in 
2004, China has become one of the fastest growing overseas markets for 
U.S. farmers. Despite this growth, however, China's regulation of the 
agricultural sector is beset by uncertainty. Capricious practices by 
Chinese customs and quarantine officials can delay or halt shipments of 
agricultural products into China, while sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards with questionable scientific bases and a generally opaque 
regulatory regime frequently bedevil traders in agricultural 
commodities. While the Administration was able to make substantial 
headway on a number of key issues in agricultural trade in 2004, 
particularly in the area of biotechnology approvals and the removal of 
problematic sanitary and phytosanitary measures that had been 
curtailing trade, maintaining and improving China's adherence to WTO 
rules in the area of agriculture will require continued high-level 
attention in the months and years to come. Currently, one of our top 
priorities in this area is for China to re-open its market to U.S. beef 
based on internationally accepted scientific standards for human and 
animal health.
      While China's Ministry of Commerce has made laudable 
moves toward adopting WTO transparency norms, other ministries and 
agencies have lagged behind. As a result, China's regulatory regimes 
continue to suffer from opacity, frustrating efforts of foreign--and 
domestic--businesses to achieve the potential benefits of China's WTO 
accession. The Administration remains committed to seeking improvements 
in this area.
U.S. Enforcement of Trade Remedy Laws
    The rapid expansion of trade between the United States and China 
since China's WTO accession has inevitably led in some cases to 
competition between our domestically produced goods and Chinese 
imports. When our industries face injurious trade with China, the 
Administration is fully committed to enforcing U.S. trade remedy laws 
and to exercising the important rights that the United States 
negotiated under China's WTO accession agreement.
     One important U.S. right is the ability to continue to apply 
special methodologies to China under the antidumping laws. The 
Administration has applied those special methodologies in numerous 
cases. Since China's entry into the WTO, the Department of Commerce has 
imposed 22 antidumping orders on imports from China, representing one-
third of total U.S. antidumping orders issued during that time period.
     As part of the WTO accession agreement, the United States 
negotiated--and China agreed to--two separate China-specific safeguard 
mechanisms that allow WTO members to address market disruption caused 
by increasing economic integration with China. One of these mechanisms, 
the product-specific safeguard, was codified as Section 421 of the 
Trade Act of 1974, and is available until December 11, 2013. Since the 
implementation of Section 421, five petitions have been brought 
requesting import relief. In two cases, the International Trade 
Commission found that our domestic producers' market had not been 
disrupted by imports from China. In three other cases, while the ITC 
found market disruption, the President determined that the adverse 
impact on the U.S. economy of employing a safeguard was clearly greater 
than the benefits from providing import relief. While to date no import 
relief has been granted under Section 421, the President, in his most 
recent determinations, reiterated his commitment to using this 
safeguard mechanism when the circumstances of a particular case 
warrant.
    The second safeguard mechanism agreed to by China as part of its 
WTO accession package, available until December 31, 2008, allows WTO 
members under certain circumstances to invoke a 7.5 percent cap on 
annual growth in imports of a given textile category for up to one year 
(6 percent for wool products). In 2003 and 2004, when most categories 
of textiles and apparel products were still subject to quotas, the 
Committee for Implementation of Textile Agreements (CITA) found for 
petitioners in four investigations under this safeguard mechanism and 
imposed 7.5 percent caps on imports of Chinese socks, knit fabric, 
brassieres, and robes and dressing gowns.
    On January 1, 2005, the structure of global trade rules that had 
governed the textiles sector for several decades changed, as all WTO 
members lifted remaining quotas on textile and clothing imports in 
accordance with an agreement negotiated more than 10 years ago. While 
the Administration has confidence in the ability of our textile 
industry to compete under these new circumstances, many countries, 
including the United States, face new competitive challenges as a 
result of the lifting of the quotas.
    In late 2004, the Administration agreed to consider 12 petitions 
from industry alleging a ``threat'' of market disruption due to 
anticipated surges in Chinese imports following the lifting of quotas 
at the beginning of this year. However, in a lawsuit initiated by one 
group of textile importers, the U.S. Court of International Trade 
enjoined the United States from further consideration of these threat-
based requests. The Administration has appealed that injunction and is 
awaiting a decision. In the interim, the Department of Commerce 
implemented a new system to monitor imports of textiles and apparel 
products in order to provide the Administration and the public timely 
access to preliminary data regarding the impact of imports on the U.S. 
market. Using that data, earlier this month, CITA self-initiated 
safeguard investigations of cotton knit shirts and blouses, cotton 
trousers and cotton and man-made fiber underwear from China, all of 
which have been imported in substantially increased quantities in the 
first three months of this year. A short time later, U.S. industry 
filed seven petitions, covering 14 other product categories. We are in 
the process of considering those now.
Broader U.S.-China Economic and Trade Cooperation
     As China's integration into the world economy deepens, it becomes 
increasingly important for the United States and China to work together 
to promote our mutual interests. The United States and China have 
discussed various ways in which we can cooperate on international 
economic and trade issues, particularly given our largely complimentary 
economies.
    Of particular importance at this time are the WTO's Doha 
Development Agenda negotiations. We have had frank discussions with 
China on the progress of those negotiations and will continue to engage 
China in an effort to promote our common areas of interest. In the 
coming year, China will become a focal point in the negotiations, as 
Hong Kong will be hosting the WTO's Sixth Ministerial Conference in 
December, when WTO members intend to set the stage for conclusion of 
the negotiations in 2006.
Conclusion
    Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for providing 
me with the opportunity to testify. I look forward to your questions.
