members of the committee. It is a 
pleasure to appear before you today to testify on the 
President's trade agenda and the newly renegotiated United 
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. I should note, before 
continuing, that there are some parts of Senator Wyden's 
comments that I do not entirely endorse, but I do entirely 
endorse Senator Wyden. [Laughter.]
    So I would like to begin by noting that the United States 
economy has added 5.8 million jobs since the 2016 election. 
Notably, nearly 500,000 have been manufacturing jobs. The real 
GDP rose at an annual rate of 3.1 percent in the first quarter 
of 2019. The past four quarters have seen the fastest growth 
rate in GDP since 2015. The unemployment rate at 3.6 percent is 
the lowest rate in nearly half a century and has been at or 
below 4 percent for 15 consecutive months. Wages are up. Hourly 
wages were up some 3.1 percent over the last 12 months.
    I commend this report right here to the committee. It is 
the trade policy agenda and the 2018 annual report to the 
committee. It is one of the subjects of this hearing. The 
document, which USTR put out recently, outlines the 
administration's trade priorities and catalogs recent 
accomplishments.
    As most of you know, the President is troubled by huge and 
persistent trade deficits which the United States has with many 
countries. These deficits are the result of many factors: 
faster economic growth, currency valuations, and to some extent 
tax policy, but they are also partially the result of trade 
rules that oftentimes are unfair and lock in non-economic 
advantages for our trading partners. We at USTR are very much 
focused on changing these rules where they are unfair to 
American farmers, ranchers, workers, and businesses. This has 
included renegotiating KORUS, of which you are aware, and 
NAFTA, which we have just discussed and will discuss further. 
We also have been reviewing GSP eligibility, actively engaging 
in TIFA talks with many, many countries--and we can talk about 
that--and reviewing the rules and functions of the WTO.
    The USTR has also been active in enforcing the existing 
obligations of our trading partners. We brought many WTO cases. 
We have filed counter-notifications to the WTO and worked with 
other WTO members on a proposal to improve compliance with the 
existing WTO notification obligations. We are also engaged 
directly with trading partners under existing agreements. For 
example, we have successfully resolved concerns with Peru after 
requesting the first-ever environmental consultations in the 
U.S.-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement. In addition, we have used 
section 301 to investigate unfair trade practices in China. We 
believe our economic relationship with China has been 
unbalanced and grossly unfair to American workers, farmers, 
ranchers, and businesses for decades. As many members know, 
after an exhaustive process, we put tariffs on certain Chinese 
products and are preparing to do more if certain issues cannot 
be resolved satisfactorily.
    Finally, I am pleased to be able to testify here today on 
the newly renegotiated USMCA. We have worked very closely with 
members throughout this process, and many of the improvements 
in this agreement reflect Republican and Democratic members' 
ideas and thoughts. In short, I believe the USMCA is the 
strongest, most momentous trade agreement in U.S. history. It 
is the gold standard for rules on the digital economy, 
financial services, intellectual property, et cetera. It will 
help stop the outflow of manufacturing jobs and return many to 
the United States. Its labor and environmental provisions are 
the most far-reaching ever in a trade agreement. The 
agricultural chapter will lead to increased market access and 
eliminate unfair trading practices by our trading partners.
    This is a truly great agreement, and I look forward to 
working with members to make it even better, and to write 
implementing legislation which will earn large bipartisan 
support. And that is my objective. I said from the beginning 
that my objective was to get a very large number of Democrats 
and Republicans to support this.
    With that, Mr. Chairman, I will stop. Thank you again for 
the courtesy you and the other members have shown towards me 
during this 2-plus years as USTR, and I look forward to your 
questions.

Last time I appeared in a hearing before this committee, I began by 
highlighting the economic success of the country under President Trump. 
I am happy to report that these trends have continued. The United 
States is growing faster than any other G7 economy. GDP grew at an 
annual rate of 3.1 percent in the first quarter of 2019 and at 3.2 
percent over the past 4 quarters. In 2018, the lowest earners 
experienced the fastest wage growth. Unemployment has hit its lowest 
rate since 1969. This trend has been particularly pronounced among 
groups such as women, Hispanics, African-Americans, veterans, and 
Americans with disabilities, all of which have seen record-low numbers 
of unemployment during this administration. Manufacturing jobs are up 
by nearly 500,000 since January 2017.

    Like the President, I remain concerned by large and persistent 
trade deficits, which can be affected by factors such as currency 
policy, taxation, economic growth rates, and my area of 
responsibility--trade rules. Despite this ongoing issue, U.S. exports 
are up significantly. From 2016 to 2018, 45 States saw their exports 
grow, while U.S. exports grew by $285 billion during that period. In 
2018, total goods and services exports exceeded $2.5 trillion for the 
first time. And of course I am here today to talk about how the 
President's trade agenda has put us on a better track for trade, 
including through the successful negotiation of the United States-
Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA).
                          trade policy agenda
    In March we issued the President's trade policy agenda. The agenda 
clearly sets out the trade situation facing the administration, our 
actions to improve the terms of trade for the benefit of Americans, and 
our plan to continue rebalancing U.S. trade relationships. This 
administration inherited a trade landscape characterized by outdated, 
imbalanced trade agreements, a failing multilateral approach to trade, 
and rampant unfair trading practices by some of our major trading 
partners. During the past year, the United States under President 
Trump's leadership renegotiated the disastrous NAFTA, amended the U.S.-
Korea trade agreement, and kicked off trade negotiations with Japan and 
the European Union. We also laid the groundwork to start trade 
negotiations with the United Kingdom as soon as it exits the EU. We 
have led the effort to improve the operation of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) by promoting a recommitment to transparency and an 
overdue reassessment of the treatment of developing countries. We have 
spearheaded efforts to pursue ambitious, high-standard agreements on 
digital trade and fish subsidies at the WTO. We have secured new market 
access for our farmers in dozens of countries around the globe. And we 
have held trade violators accountable through robust enforcement 
actions under U.S. law and at the WTO.

    In opening this new chapter in American trade policy, we have 
coordinated with other countries where possible and taken unilateral 
actions where appropriate. But we should be clear-eyed and realistic 
about working with our allies. They agree with us on many important 
matters but do not always have the same level of ambition as the United 
States in securing a level playing field in international trade. I 
mention just as an example the European Union, which shares with us 
many concerns about non-market-oriented policies and practices, forced 
technology transfer, and the like. Together with my counterparts from 
the EU and Japan, we have engaged in a trilateral process that focuses 
on developing new rules for industrial subsidies, establishing criteria 
for truly market-based trading regimes, and exchanging information and 
coordinating action with respect to forced technology transfer. At the 
same time, the EU's tariff and non-tariff barriers pose significant 
obstacles to U.S. exports, particularly agricultural exports. So while 
we work closely with our allies on matters of common concern, we also 
stand up for the American worker and farmer as needed. We have shown 
that we will not be complacent while other countries, allies or 
otherwise, take advantage of American workers, farmers, ranchers, and 
businesses.
                                 usmca
    Without question, the USMCA is the strongest and most advanced 
trade agreement ever negotiated. The agreement rebalances our trading 
relationship with Mexico and Canada in a way that benefits American 
workers, and it modernizes the rules of trade among our countries to 
reflect the needs of our 21st-century economy. Based on estimates from 
the independent International Trade Commission, we anticipate that the 
USMCA will raise U.S. real GDP by up to 1.2 percent and increase U.S. 
employment by up to half a million jobs over time.

    As you know, this agreement was negotiated from the beginning and 
throughout with both Democrats and Republicans in Congress. My team and 
I spent countless hours consulting with members and your staffs on the 
negotiations. We also consulted with a broad range of stakeholders 
including business, labor, the agricultural community, and civil 
society. These stakeholders are largely unified in recognizing the 
benefits of the USMCA, and there is a chorus of supporters urging 
Congress to approve implementing legislation for the agreement. I 
continue to believe that the USMCA will win broad support in Congress, 
as it is designed to do.

    The USMCA contains the most ambitious labor chapter that has ever 
been negotiated. It is in the core of the agreement, and it is fully 
enforceable. It prohibits violence against workers and requires each 
country to respect internationally recognized labor rights. Mexico 
agreed to--and has approved--historic labor reform legislation that 
will eliminate so-called ``protection contracts'' by ensuring secret 
ballot votes on labor union representation and collective bargaining 
agreements. This is a watershed development for labor, and we 
anticipate it will reduce incentives to outsource American jobs and 
have a big impact on the ability of U.S. workers to compete on a level 
playing field with their Mexican counterparts.

    USMCA's stricter rules of origin for automobiles and other products 
are already creating incentives for businesses to increase jobs and 
production in the United States. We increased the regional value 
content threshold for automobiles well above NAFTA levels, we included 
a requirement for North American steel and aluminum in autos, and we 
established the first-ever ``labor value content'' rule to encourage 
production and assembly in the United States. Under this rule, 40 to 45 
percent of a vehicle must be manufactured in North American facilities 
with an average manufacturing wage of $16 an hour. This requirement 
will preserve and increase U.S. jobs in the sector. Indeed, based on 
data that USTR has received from auto producers, we estimate an 
increase of over 75,000 direct auto-sector jobs in the United States 
during the first 5 years of the USMCA's implementation. This is a 
result of over $30 billion in direct investments during that period and 
annual increases in U.S. auto parts sourcing of $23 billion a year.

    The United States has a strong competitive advantage in services, 
intellectual property, and the digital economy. The USMCA locks in 
rules that assure the free flow of data across borders and prohibits 
duties on digital products. It commits our trading partners to higher 
standards of intellectual property protection and enforcement, 
incentivizing our innovators as they create the products and technology 
that lead to greater prosperity for all Americans.

    The USMCA has provisions designed to combat unfair trade practices, 
including rules on currency manipulation, state-owned enterprises and 
subsidies, duty evasion, and transparency and accountability in trade 
relationships with non-market economies.

    Comprehensive and enforceable environmental standards are also 
central to the agreement and, unlike the NAFTA, have been included in 
the core text of the agreement. Additionally, there are a series of 
good governance chapters on technical barriers to trade, anti-
corruption, Customs procedures, good regulatory practices, among others 
designed to prevent trade-related barriers in North America.

    Finally, the USMCA has a new review and termination mechanism that 
ensures that the United States will never again be in a position where 
it has permanently given away its economic leverage or become hostage 
to outdated rules. I believe this mechanism will encourage thoughtful, 
periodic assessment of whether the agreement is working as intended and 
ultimately create more domestic support for trade.

    I will continue to work with the committee and other members of 
Congress as we draft implementing legislation for the USMCA. I am aware 
of specific areas where members have ideas to strengthen the agreement, 
and we are having constructive discussions on how to make improvements. 
Timely passage of the implementing legislation for the USMCA will 
benefit American workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses throughout 
the country. My hope is that working with members, we can submit 
implementing legislation that Congress can approve very soon.
