Thank you all for being here on this Valentine’s morning. This is an
important day for USTR. We are today announcing the results of our Top-to-Bottom Review.
Some of you have been in discussion with me about this the past several months.
If you recall that when I was nominated to be the U.S. Trade Representative, I said I wanted to
undertake a “top-to-bottom” review of the U.S. trade policy with respect to China. We’ve done
that. We’ve undertaken a thorough and detailed look at our trade relationship with China – its
development over the past 20 years, core principles underlying that trade policy, and the
challenges that we face.
The review was informed by a lot of input including from Congress, industry, China experts,
other government agencies, through an intensive inner agency process, public testimony. This
was the first comprehensive review of U.S. trade policy towards China actually since China
joined the WTO in 2001.
Today I am delivering that report to Congress summarizing the results of this review. It
concludes that we are entering a new phase of our trade relationship with China. The first phase
covered the 15 years from 1986 to 2001, when the United States worked very hard to get China
into the rules-based WTO system. The second phase has included the past 4 years as we helped
guide China’s transition as a new WTO member. As of this year, the deadline to implement
most of China’s WTO commitments has now passed, and we are now entering a new phase - one
in which China is recognized as a “mature” and successful member of the global trading system.
The U.S. has derived certain benefits from having China in the rules-based trading system. One
example, of course would be now that we have received just late last week the 2005 trade
numbers, we now know that we have had three consecutive years of strong U.S. export growth to
China – each year exceeding 20% growth, making China, incidentally, our largest export market
among major economies. However, overall, our U.S-China trade relationship today lacks equity,
durability and balance in the opportunities it provides.
This disparity is due in part to China’s failure to honor certain commitments, including its failure
to enforce intellectual property rights, its protection and support for certain domestic industries,
and its refusal to fulfill certain market opening commitments, all of which play a role in the
record bilateral trade deficit figures which were released late last week.
Looking forward, the report outlines our objectives and priority goals. As a mature trading
partner, China should be held accountable for its actions and required to live up to its
responsibilities, including enforcing intellectual property rights, allowing market forces to drive economic development and opening its markets. We will use all options available to meet this
challenge.
The report also announces a series of actions that we propose to take to help us achieve these
objectives, including the following:
First, more rigorous enforcement. The report announces the creation of a China Enforcement
Task Force at USTR, headed by a new Chief Counsel for China. Although unprecedented at
USTR, I believe this kind of dedicated, country-specific enforcement team is needed to secure
China’s compliance with its commitments.
The United States is the only country, as you may know, that has brought a case against China in
the WTO. We were prepared to bring a second one only a few weeks ago, but at the last moment
China reversed an unfair antidumping order against U.S. exporters of an important product for us
called kraft liner board in response to our specific threat to bring the case. If China does not
take affirmative steps to address other outstanding issues, including its inadequate protection of
intellectual property rights and its rules that discriminate against imported auto parts, we are
prepared to pursue legal options in those cases as well.
Second, is strengthening USTR’s Information Collection with Respect to China. In my view, the
formation and implementation of our China trade policy – including our enforcement – needs to
be informed by more comprehensive, forward-looking information and analysis about China’s
economic development. We need to be anticipating challenges in the years ahead, not just
addressing the concerns of yesterday or today. The report calls for the dedication of new China-specific resources at USTR to coordinate collection and integration of information on China’s
trade regime. It also calls for the establishment of a senior level advisory task force to advise on
China trade policy.
Third, is expanding trade negotiating capacity in Beijing. The report calls for expansion of our
trade negotiating capacity there – we need a trade negotiator on the ground - we do not have that
now, in fact we do not have that anywhere except in Brussels and of course our Geneva/WTO
office. This is a person who would be in constant communication with U.S. business and
Chinese officials, and who would be in a position to strengthen trade enforcement and
compliance efforts. This individual will also help remove barriers and promote greater market
access for U.S. goods and services, work to ensure transparency, better intellectual property
enforcement, and even more- and more even- application of the rule of law in China. 

Fourth, enhancing cooperation with our trading partners. As you’ll see, the report calls for
expanding our cooperation with other trading partners as we seek to address common challenges.
Concerns that I’ve raised today with regard to China’s practices are not limited to US exports, of
course. Recently, as one example of our increased coordination already, we have worked with
Japan and Switzerland to seek evidence through the WTO regarding China’s intellectual
property rights enforcement and compliance. We’re seeking to work with the European Union
currently with respect to Chinese discriminatory- discriminatory tariffs affecting auto parts, so
we’ve begun some of this coordination, we believe it should be enhanced.
I would also like to see us work jointly to promote more constructive participation by China in the international trading system. As the report notes, China should take on responsibilities
commensurate with its economic heft and the benefits it currently derives from global trade
system. This means, in part, that China must play a larger role in the Doha Round of trade
negotiations. It should also accede to the WTO Government Procurement Agreement and the
World Intellectual Property Organization Internet Treaties. We will improve coordination with
other trading partners on China matters, especially with the EU and Japan, to help achieve these
goals.
Fifth to deepen and strengthen U.S. economic and trade relationships in the Asia and Pacific
area. We cannot sit back, and we will not sit back. We must proactively engage economies like
Singapore, Thailand, Korea, India, Vietnam and Malaysia, as well as working with regional
organizations like ASEAN and APEC, to help maintain a robust U.S. economic presence in this
critical region. Our FTA negotiations, WTO accession negotiations, and special dialogues with
these countries are an important part of this engagement.
In conclusion, I would just like to say I consider this not the end, but the beginning of an
important new dialogue on China policy that we will be having with Congress and other
stakeholders and the American people. I made that clear in the cover letter I sent to the
Chairmen and Ranking Members of the Senate Finance and Ways and Means Committee today.
This is a report – top to bottom – of U.S. China trade opportunities and challenges. We are open
to additional input and ideas going forward.
At the end of the day, I believe it is in the interest of the United States to have China play a
constructive role as a peaceful and prosperous player on the global stage. The U.S. helped usher
China into the rules-based trading system to open China’s market, broaden its obligations and
implement the trade reforms required by WTO membership. We must now adjust our trade
policy to ensure that Americans enjoy the full benefits of these achievements.
Again, thank you all for coming and I’ll open for any questions you might have. 