
    Ambassador LIGHTHIZER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman 
and Ranking Member Neal, and Members of the Committee. I'm 
pleased to be here today.
    We at USTR greatly appreciate the expertise of the Members 
of this Committee. We're grateful for all the time you give us 
in working up truly bipartisan trade policy, the efforts you've 
helped us with on NAFTA and the many issues we face.
    Before I continue with my statement let me just say since I 
generally when I come here complain about the fact that I have 
no deputies I, in fact, have deputies now. So I thought it 
would be appropriate since they're all going to be senior 
members I believe but members of your staffs that I probably 
ought to at least have you know who's working for you now 
besides me.
    Jeffrey Gerrish, maybe if you would stand up, Jeff, is our 
deputy for Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. C.J. Mahoney is 
our deputy for Africa, China, the western hemisphere, and he's 
also going to do investment and services. And he will be our 
transparency officer. You'll recall that we selected an 
appointed official as our transparency officer. So those are 
the two people that I wanted you to focus on, if you would, 
since they're brand new.
    First I would like to draw the Committee's attention to the 
fact that this year the trade deficit in goods and services 
rose to $565 billion and in goods alone it was $811 billion. Of 
course these numbers there are lots of causes for these 
numbers, but the President believes and I also agree that 
longstanding trade deficits to some extent reflect market 
distortions and that they're having a negative effect on U.S. 
workers and businesses.
    We also, of course, have a massive trade deficit with China 
which we ought to speak about at some point of $375 billion so 
the numbers essentially got worse last year. I know that 
Members have a variety of views on these figures, but the 
President believes that they raise significant concerns. They 
indicate that sometimes the global rules of trade make it 
harder for U.S. companies to compete and specifically to 
export. Trade deficit also indicate that the United States--
that in the United States the cost of globalization are falling 
more heavily on blue-collar workers, and this is something that 
is bad for the economy and bad for the society. Finally, they 
tend to undermine the support for the global trading system, so 
trade deficits are a problem.
    Quickly I would outline the President's trade agenda. 
First, we at USTR will support the President's national 
security strategy. If you haven't looked at that I would 
recommend it to you. That means that our trade policy will help 
to build a stronger America, preserve our national sovereignty, 
respond to hostile economic competitors, recognize the 
importance of technology and seek opportunities to work with 
other countries that share our goals.
    Second, for U.S. companies and workers to be competitive in 
overseas markets we need a strong and robust economy at home, 
and I commend the Committee for the work they did on the tax 
cut bill.
    Third, we are negotiating trade deals that will work for 
all Americans. As Members of this Committee well know, the 
President directed us to seek significant changes to NAFTA. We 
have already had seven rounds with our partners in Canada and 
Mexico, and I believe that we've made a great deal of progress. 
We've also begun discussions, as most of you know, with South 
Korea on updating KORUS. Now that we have a full team of 
deputies, we intend to aggressively pursue other potential free 
trade agreements. We have a trade working group with the United 
Kingdom. We have told Japan that we're interesting in having a 
free trade agreement with them at the appropriate time. We are 
prepared to explore the possible countries in Africa and South 
Asia who might be appropriate for us to enter into free trade 
agreements, and as you said, Mr. Chairman, the President has 
asked for the extension of trade promotion authority to 
accomplish this.
    Fourth, we are enforcing our trade laws. The President 
indicated he would use all available trade laws to defend U.S. 
workers, farmers, and ranchers against unfair trade, and he is, 
in fact, doing that.
    Finally, we seek to reform the multilateral trading system. 
For too long the WTO has failed to promote trade 
liberalization. Too many WTO members view it as a litigation 
forum and not as a negotiation forum. In short, USTR under the 
direction of President Trump is seeking to build a better, 
fairer system of global trade that will lead to higher 
standards for all Americans.
    Thank you, and I look forward to taking your questions, Mr. 
Chairman.

Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify this morning. Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Neal, I am grateful for the advice and cow1sel that you have provided
throughout my period at USTR. I also want to thank all the Members of this Committee for the
time you have given to me and my staff in recent months. We at USTR greatly appreciate the
expertise of Members, and the effort you put into working with us on NAFTA and the many
other trade issues facing the nation.
Before taking your question, I would like to mention two important topics.
First, I would draw the Committee's attention to the fact that last year, the U.S. trade
deficit in goods and services rose to $568.4 billion, while the trade deficit in goods alone rose to
$81 1.2 billion. Of course there are a number of causes for these deficits but the President
believes - and I agree - that long-standing trade deficits to some extent reflect market distortions
around the world that put U.S. workers and businesses in an unfair position compared to their
international competitors. It is widely known, of course, that we have a massive trade deficit in
goods with China - $375.2 billion last year. But we also had a goods trade deficit of$151.4
billion with the European Union, $68.8 billion with Japan, and almost $90 billion with our
NAFTA partners.
I know that the Members here have a variety of views on these figures. But for the
President they raise significant concerns. They indicate that sometimes the global rules of trade
make it harder for U.S. companies to export. The trade deficit also indicates U1at in the United
States, the costs of globalization are falling most heavily on blue-collar workers in those parts of the economy exposed to trade. And they undermine U.S. political support for the global trading
system.
I would also like to discuss the President's Trade Agenda, which we released a few
weeks ago. We are focused on five major priorities.
First, we at USTR will support the President's National Security Strategy. That means
that our trade policy will help to build a stronger America, preserve our national sovereignty,
respond to hostile economic competitors, recognize the importance of technology, and seek
opportunities to work with other countries that share our goals.
Second, for U.S. companies and workers to be competitive in overseas markets, we need
a strong and robust economy at home. The Congress has passed, and President Trump signed, a
major tax reform bill. The Administration has also begun making regulatory changes that will
strengthen the U.S. economy.
Third, we are negotiating trade deals that will work for Americans. As the members of
this Committee well know, the President has directed us to seek significant changes to NAFTA.
We have already held seven rounds of talks with our partners in Canada and Mexico, and I
believe that we have made a great deal of progress - but we still have a ways to go. I have urged
our trading partners to recognize that time is short if we are to complete a deal in tin1e for
consideration by this Congress. We have begun talks with South Korea to discuss potential
improvements in our free trade agreement with them.
Now that we have a full team of deputies, we intend to aggressively pursue other
potential free trade agreements. We have a trade working group in place with the United
Kingdom to lay the groundwork for when they are eligible to enter into a free trade agreement
following their final exit from the European Union. We have told Japan of our desire to negotiate a free trade agreement with them at the appropriate time. We also have hopes for
potential IT As in Africa and Southeast Asia. Given this agenda, the President will soon ask the
Congress for an extension of Trade Promotion Authority until 2021. We look forward to
working with you on these new deals.
Fourth, we are enforcing and defending U.S. trade laws. During the Presidential
campaign of2016, President Trump said that he would use all available tools to defend our
national interest and our national security- including Sections 201 and 30 I of the Trade Act of
1974, and Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. Those promises are being fulfilled -
and our trading partners are on notice that this President will act when necessary to address
unfair trading practices that disadvantage American workers, fanners, and businesses. We are
also aggressively defending our trade laws in litigation at the World Trade Organization.
Finally, we seek to reform the multilateral trading system. For too long, the WTO has
failed to promote trade liberalization. Too many members remain committed to an outdated
Doha Round Agenda that is incapable of addressing modem issues like digital trade. Too many
members also think that they can get their way through litigation, rather than negotiation.
Perhaps most worryingly of all, the WTO has proven to be wholly inadequate to deal with
China's version of a state-dominated economy that rejects market principles.
In short, USTR - under the direction of President Tnm1p - is seeking to build a better,
fairer system of global markets that will lead to higher living standards for Americans. I am
excited about our efforts, and am happy to take your questions.  