Acknowledgements and Introduction

1) Thank you, Steve [Stewart, IBM]. It is a pleasure and honor to have
been preceded at the podium by Madame Li, a true bridge builder,
and General Scowcroft, a great scholar and statesman. What a
timely occasion to consider the state of U.S.-China Trade relations.
In China, officials at the 17th Party Congress have just selected new
leaders, who will chart China’s economic course over the next few
years. In the United States, government officials are also debating
actions that will shape the direction of our future commercial ties
with China. President Nixon’s outreach to Beijing 35 years ago was
the start of an historic saga -- marked by President Carter’s
establishment of diplomatic relations and President Clinton’s
leadership to bring China into the World Trade Organization.
Leaders from both parties have had the vision to see that
engagement offers the best chance of promoting peace and
prosperity for both the American and the Chinese people.
a) Economic engagement – the policy of promoting China’s active
participation in trade and its adherence to the norms of the global
trading system -- has worked well for the last 30 years. It has
worked well for China and it has worked well for the United
States. It has benefited both of our economies, and it has
benefited both of our peoples.

b) And yet, we are at a pivotal and – in some ways, awkward moment in our economic relationship. There are forces both in
China and in the United States that would move us away from a
policy of engagement. In both our countries, there are forces that
would have us close our doors to the other – potentially in
contravention of our international obligations, and certainly
against our best interests. This would, in my judgment, be an
enormous mistake.

c) This evening, I want to talk with you about our economic and
trade relationship. About the enormous benefits we reap from it.
About the challenges we face and how we are addressing those –
firmly, legally, and with an eye to results. And, I will explore the
growing threat from those who seek to erect barriers that we have
spent the past three decades tearing down.

Mutual Benefits of U.S.-China Relationship

2) Let me turn first to the trade relationship. Here are the facts. They
tell a very positive story:

a) Over the past 15 years, bilateral trade in goods between our two
countries has increased by 1200 percent! Over the past six alone,
bilateral goods trade has nearly tripled and services trade has
more than doubled. Investment flows remain strong.
b) China’s economy has grown by nearly ten percent a year for the
past 20 years, and nearly 400 million people have been lifted out
of poverty. China has also emerged as an enormous, rapidly
growing market for U.S. goods and services, helping to sustain
strong U.S. economic growth rates.

i) U.S. exports of manufactured goods, agricultural products, and
services have grown an average of 23 percent a year since
China joined the WTO in December of 2001.

ii) China is today our fourth largest export market, and the fastest
growing export market for the United States in the world.

(1)

It is the fourth largest market for our agricultural

produce. It is the largest market for U.S. cotton and
soybeans exports.
(2)

Boeing estimates that China will purchase 3,380

aircraft over the next 20 years, worth roughly $350 billion.
Now there is a good reason to stay engaged with China!

c) In addition to specific trade data, there are also positive
indications of the overall direction of the evolving enterprise that
is Sino-U.S. economic engagement.

i) This includes growing government-to-government contacts,
with new fora like the Strategic Economic Dialogue to
complement existing dialogues like Joint Commission on
Commerce and Trade,

ii) As well as China’s substantial achievements in meeting its
WTO reform commitments.

d) All of this has been achieved because the US and China decided
to engage economically, rather than continue the policies of
economic separation that characterized the 1950s, 60s and 70s.

Bilateral Trade Challenges

3) To recognize the tremendous achievements of bilateral economic
engagement is not to turn a blind eye to problems in the bilateral
relationship.

4) Because China’s rise has occurred contemporaneously with
incredibly dynamic changes in our economy, many Americans
associate worries about their long-term job and wage prospects with
China.

5) Certainly, U.S. businesses question whether the playing field is
even. Some of the specific concerns are very familiar so I will only
briefly mention them now. Later, I will discuss how these bear on
our broader economic relationship.

a) First, there is the bilateral trade deficit. We know our trade
imbalance is due to a number of factors, not all of which are trade
related -- from differences in savings rates to shifts in assembly to
China from other Asian countries. Still, as USTR stated in our
Top to Bottom Review of Chinese trade ties 18 months ago, we
must work for more “equity and balance” in our relationship with
China.

b) Also, as Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said to you earlier
today, China must allow its currency to appreciate more rapidly.

c) Another serious matter is intellectual property rights protection.
Last year, 81 percent of infringing items seized at the US border
were from China, up from 69 percent the year before that. China
can – and must – do better. The problem is one of enforcement,
which we are attempting to address by working with China and by
asserting our rights within the WTO.
d) Yet another area of contention is government subsidies prohibited
by the WTO. This creates an uneven playing field for U.S.
producers in China, the U.S. and third country markets. We have
taken an important first step by challenging a number of China’s
prohibited subsidies at the WTO.

e) Another concern is a systemic lack of transparency and weakness
in the rule of law in China. China has certainly improved the
transparency of its legal and rulemaking processes, but we would
like to see more progress in this area, including through
establishment of a mandatory process for public notice and
comment on proposed laws and regulations.

f) Lately, of course, a new matter has been making the headlines:
product safety. This issue has concerned American consumers
and drawn intense scrutiny from Congress – for good reason. We
expect that the goods we buy are safe for us and our families.
i) The Administration has reacted quickly and thoughtfully. At
the direction of the President, Health and Human Services
Secretary Leavitt is chairing an inter-agency Import Safety
Working Group, of which USTR is a member. This group does
not target China. It targets the safety of all products regardless
of country of origin.

ii) When this issue initially emerged, some in China lashed out
with counter-allegations of substandard U.S. exports, or by
blaming the media. It was an ill-considered initial response,
conveying defensiveness and a failure to understand the
seriousness of these issues, rather than a commitment to regain
consumers’ trust. It seemed like China was following its initial
SARS playbook instead of its Olympics playbook. It only
enhanced concerns about the “Made in China” label.
iii)

More recently, however, we have seen signs that China is

beginning to recognize the importance of strong, remedial
measures. The fact that Madame Wu Yi was tasked to lead
China's safety campaign may signal that China has realized this
is not simply a spat being fueled by the press. This is about
consumer confidence in Chinese products in the largest market
in the world. The U.S. Government stands ready to work with
China to help it take the tough steps needed to regain public
confidence.

g) In addressing all these issues, the Bush Administration is using
the tools at our disposal to remedy these challenges with the goal
of permitting more trade and investment to occur. That, in a
nutshell, is at the core of engagement.
i) To be clear, engagement does not mean accepting Chinese
practices that we consider unfair, unreasonable or unsafe.

ii) Generally, we will try first to engage through bilateral dialogue,
including through fora such as the Joint Commission on
Commerce and Trade. Why? Because it is often the most
effective means to resolve problems. Through engagement, we
have worked to secure China’s commitment to accede to the
Government Procurement Agreement. We have also facilitated
the expansion of our insurance companies in China, and
expanded our airlines’ rights to serve the Chinese market. And,
we have made progress in protecting the intellectual property
rights of business software.

iii)

But where bilateral dialogue is not successful, we have - and

we will continue - to act quickly, firmly, and decisively, using
both domestic U.S. trade remedies and dispute settlement before
the WTO.
iv) We have brought four formal WTO cases in the past 14
months and we are determined to press our cases vigorously in
the months ahead. But, importantly, this should not be regarded
as a failure in our trade relationship with China. Quite the
contrary. Resorting to dispute settlement is itself a form of
engagement. It is evidence of two countries working to resolve
disputes about obligations through neutral, legal mechanisms.
WTO Dispute settlement is designed to prevent trade wars
rather than fuel them.

v) China has no doubt noted that our differences are not merely
bilateral. Other WTO members, such as the EU, Japan, Canada,
and Mexico, have supported U.S. efforts to encouraging greater
Chinese adherence to the rules of global trade. IN fact, my EU
counterpart recently commented that the EU needs to find a
“tougher posture” with China. So the United States is not alone.
The Biggest Challenges: Economic Fear and Neo-Mercantilism

6) While these specific matters are serious, the more important threats
to strong and healthy trade ties involve broader issues concerning
what I would call the mindsets of our two countries. The overall
direction of China and the United States concerning trade, much
more than specific disputes, are what should be of concern to policy
makers and the public alike.

7) Paramount is the need to steer clear of economic retrenchment –
both in the United States and in China.

a) In China, economic retrenchment seems to be taking the form of
shielding China’s economy from the very market forces that have
allowed it to grow so rapidly.
i) Last year, in our annual report on China’s progress in meeting
its WTO accession commitments, we noted some apparent
backsliding in market-oriented economic reforms.
Unfortunately, developments this year have increased our
concerns.

ii) Recent actions by the Chinese government, taken together,
provide reason to worry that China will use its regulatory and
other policies to develop so-called “national champions” and tilt
the playing field against foreign competitors.

(1)

We see this reflected in the promotion of homegrown

technology through biased national standards, the
emergence of regulators as competitors, the requirement to
disclose proprietary information, the use of government
procurement to favor Chinese companies, and recent draft
amendments to the patent laws.

(2)

We see it also in China’s investment laws, where China

has signaled that, henceforth, state operated enterprises
should absolutely control, or at least maintain a “strong
controlling position” over broad swaths of its industry – in
sectors such as equipment manufacturing, automobiles, iron
and steel.

(3)

And we are concerned that we may also see it in

nascent areas of regulation, such as competition law. While
China’s adoption of an antimonopoly law is a good
development, uncertainty over how that law applies to state
owned enterprises has raised concerns.
iii)

In essence, we see concerning signs that state planners may

seek to steer China down an economic development course that
differs from the direction and velocity advocated by Deng
Xiaopeng. Protecting national champion industries at home is
not in China’s best interests. China’s recent history shows that
openness yields growth, innovation, and competitiveness.
Protectionism and isolation from market forces only yields
inefficiency, corruption, and trade frictions – and that is not the
path to a more “harmonious society.”
b) A strong positive signal of China’s direction could be evidenced
by meaningful offers in the Doha Round of trade talks. The
Round now stands at a critical juncture and the stakes are high.
This fall brought the resumption of negotiations based on draft
Agriculture and Industrial goods texts proposed by the relevant
WTO Chairs. If our trading partners are also willing to do so, the
United States has signaled our willingness to negotiate on the
basis of the texts. This includes the ranges and flexibilities in the
texts that will yield a strong market access outcome, the
elimination of agriculture export subsidies and significant cuts in
trade-distorting farm support.
(1)

Last year, when I spoke to business leaders in Beijing, I

observed that China still appeared to be assessing its role in the
WTO and in the Round. I noted that China has not put forward
any major initiatives in the Doha Round, but instead was
content to let India, Brazil, and others, among major developing
countries, take the lead. This is counter-intuitive, as many
nations are taking defensive negotiating positions precisely so
they can block China’s offensive interests!

(2)

Since then, China has taken some positive steps. At the

Leader level, President Hu signed the APEC Leaders
Declaration which unambiguously agreed to negotiate on the
basis of the draft texts in Agriculture and industrial goods. A
few weeks ago, Chinese press reported President Hu saying that
China should “proactively shoulder international
responsibilities” in the multilateral system. The system needs
this to happen. China, as a major beneficiary of the system,
needs this to happen.
(3)

Unfortunately, in Geneva, China’s actions at the WTO thus

far seem at odds with this position. Two weeks ago, China
signed onto a proposal pushed by a few other obstructionist
countries that focused on what they cannot do, rather than what
they will do to advance Doha. This proposal – which,
ironically, would hurt China’s exports -- is the greatest current
threat to the Round. I urge China to pull back from the brink
and unambiguously commit to the market access and
flexibilities put on the table by the chairs -- just as Indian Prime
Minister Singh has indicated his country will.

c) In the United States, economic retrenchment takes the form of
legislation – some of it ill-conceived - to impose tariffs, or
opposition to trade agreements before an honest debate on their
merits has taken place.
i) Trade has become the black hole of all economic anxiety -- even
though economists tell us that trade accounts for only two or
three percent of annual job losses. To hear the trade skeptics
talk, who would think we have created over 8 million jobs in the
last four years, unemployment is a low 4.7 percent and
manufacturing output is at an all-time high?

ii) Unfortunately, China has become the poster child for this rising
sense of protectionism.

iii)

The myriad benefits of our two-way trade and investment

relationship are drowned out by the drumbeat for legislation to
“get tough” with China – often with little regard for the
consequences or WTO-consistency of that legislation.

(1)

It is likely that both Houses of Congress will grapple

with bills related to currency, trade remedies, product safety,
and enforcement procedures. Some of the bills would slap
on new retaliatory tariffs. They are crude tools for a
complex task. They focus on the wrong issues and are
likely to do nothing to help or, even worse, to hurt the
American workers, farmers, and entrepreneurs they purport
to help.

(2)

The Congress should be wary of snake-oil salesmen

peddling Dobbesian choices and selling quick-fix schemes
for addressing complex international economic challenges.
Those Members now in positions of responsibility would be
wise to be deliberate and proceed with caution. What they
say and do matters – much more than it did prior to the 2006
elections – and the markets are watching.
(3)

To defeat counter-productive legislation we will have to

educate lawmakers and the public. From aerospace to
financial services to agriculture, we must be careful to not
abandon future opportunities that come from economic
engagement with China because of today’s challenges in our
relationship. More thoughtful observers and veterans of
Sino-U.S. trade ties, including many of you in this audience,
can play a very helpful role in that effort by sharing your
wisdom, advice, and counsel with key decision makers.

Conclusion

In this time of rapid change and closer integration of
participants in the global trading system, it is imperative for veteran
trading powers such as the United States and major new actors, such
as China, to champion the benefits of the free and fair flow of
commerce.

If the United States seems at times impatient with the
velocity and magnitude of the reforms China has undertaken to
become a member of the global trading community, it is because
China’s impact on trade, and indeed on all human endeavors, has
also increased in its velocity and magnitude.

Given its vast size and the enormous energy and dynamism
of its people, China has an urgent task to move forward on
embracing market principles. The Chinese people and the other five
billion people who share this planet are all stakeholders in a strong,
stable China.

Thank you.

