    Mr. Bader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will indeed excerpt 
my statement and submit the full statement for the record.
    Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to appear before this 
Subcommittee today to discuss the benefits to the United States 
of renewing normal trade relations status with the People's 
Republic of China. China's NTR status has wider implications 
than merely the U.S.-China relationship, as important as that 
is. My colleagues from the Departments of State and Commerce 
will discuss with this and other Committees why the granting of 
normal trade relations status is in the broad U.S. national 
interest. My testimony will focus on the ongoing negotiations 
on China's accession into the World Trade Organization and the 
interplay between that issue and NTR status.
    Once China accedes to the WTO, pursuant to last year's 
legislation, permanent NTR status will become effective for 
China provided the President sends the required certification 
to the Congress. This will obviate the need for Jackson-Vanik 
waiver, annual renewal, and this annual debate. Thus, there is 
a statutory linkage between NTR status for China and its 
accession to the WTO.
    More broadly, China's accession to the WTO will be a major 
and direct step forward in advancing some of the objectives 
that underlie our annual debate on NTR, assuring significantly 
greater market access for U.S. business, farmers, and ranchers 
to China's large and expanding market and encouraging the 
development of the rule of law in China.
    The November 1999 U.S.-China Bilateral Agreement on China's 
accession to the WTO capped nearly 14 years of intense, often 
difficult negotiations. It provided us with a set of 
comprehensive, verifiable and, as you said in your statement, 
Mr. Chairman, one-way trade concessions that substantially open 
China's market across the spectrum to U.S. goods, services, and 
agriculture. I want to acknowledge the tremendous efforts of 
Ambassador Barshefsky in achieving this result and note the 
bipartisan support for that agreement and for the steps we have 
taken since.
    This Subcommittee is familiar with the details of our 
bilateral agreement and there is no need to review them today. 
My written statement does review them. I will dispense with 
them today.
    In addition to improved market access, China has agreed to 
change practices that have made it difficult for U.S. companies 
to do business in China and hindered the developments of 
China's economy as well. These broad-based reforms include 
commitments to greater transparency in the operation of China's 
trade regime. Laws, regulations, and other measures will be 
published before they are enforced, and interested parties will 
have an opportunity to comment on the provisions before they 
are implemented. Administrative actions relating to trade 
matters will be subject to judicial review. Beijing has been 
systematically reviewing and revising or abolishing laws and 
regulations inconsistent with WTO requirements.
    The 1999 agreements did not mark the end of China's WTO 
accession process. Still to be completed was the negotiation of 
the multilateral documents essential to the accession package--
the Protocol of Accession and the Working Party Report. These 
documents describe how WTO rules will apply to China and how 
China intends to implement the commitment it is undertaking. It 
is principally these negotiations that have occupied Ambassador 
Zoellick and our delegation, first in Shanghai last month and 
most recently at the Working Party meeting in Geneva last week.
    In Shanghai, Ambassador Zoellick negotiated the following 
improvements in China's accession package:
    First, an agreement on agricultural domestic support that 
limits China's recourse to provisions of the WTO Agreement on 
Agriculture to levels below that available for developing 
countries.
    Second, a commitment from China to assure that its 
restrictions on chain stores do not inappropriately restrict 
the right of American retailers to operate fully owned 
distribution outlets.
    Third, a commitment from China on how it will allow foreign 
companies, including those from the United States, to export to 
China on a nondiscriminatory, nondiscretionary basis without 
burdensome requirements.
    And, fourth, several improvements in access to the 
insurance market of China.
    In Geneva this past week, we obtained multilateral 
endorsements of these achievements. In addition, we achieved 
international consensus on Working Party provisions on numerous 
issues crucial to assuring market access and fair trade with 
China.
    Just a few additional points about China's WTO commitments:
    First, they are effective immediately upon accession. Most 
will phase in. Some will be effective on day one. Most will 
phase in in 3 years, and then virtually in all cases in 5 
years.
    Second, the agreements are enforceable. We will enforce 
them through our trade laws, WTO dispute settlement processes, 
as necessary, and other mechanisms including an annual 
multilateral review of China's implementation and compliance 
for 8 years, with an additional review in the 10th year.
    Third, the agreement helps ensure that trade with China 
does not injure U.S. industry and workers. The special 
antidumping provision we negotiated allows us to use nonmarket 
economy methodology in judging prices of imports from China for 
15 years. The special safeguards provision and the procedures 
in our PNTR legislation allows the U.S. to act quickly to 
address rapidly increasing imports from China.
    And fourth, the increased transparency and accountability 
that WTO membership and implementation of WTO rules compel will 
have a positive effect in other areas. The essence of the WTO 
is that it is a rules-based system that requires its members in 
turn to play by the rules, with the openness and transparency 
in rulemaking and rule enforcement I noted earlier.
    It appears we are nearing the end game in this accession 
process. I will be going back to Geneva with my delegation this 
weekend for another Working Party meeting whose objective will 
be to produce a completed Protocol of Accession, a Working 
Party Report with as few unresolved issues as possible, and 
final consolidated schedules on goods and services. If we are 
successful, this package will be sent to capitals for review. 
It is possible that early in the fall, what we hope will be the 
final Working Party session on China will convene to approve 
final texts of all these documents.
    The full accession package will be reviewed by Ambassador 
Zoellick and other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government. 
After that review, the President will decide whether he can 
certify to the Congress, as required in the PNTR legislation, 
that the final package is at least equivalent to the bilateral 
agreement negotiated in 1999. It is our objective to produce a 
final package that meets that standard.
    If the President is able to produce such a certification 
and if other countries provide similar approvals, WTO members 
at a meeting of the General Council, or possibly at the WTO 
Ministerial meeting at Doha in November, would then approve the 
terms of China's accession to the WTO.
    A final point. We fully expect the WTO to approve Taiwan's 
accession in the same time frame as China's. As a major player 
in international trade and a new and thriving democracy, Taiwan 
deserves membership and a larger role in the international 
community. We have discussed our expectations on Taiwan's 
accession thoroughly with all the concerned parties and are 
confident there is a consensus on this.
    If we fail to grant NTR status to China, it is predictable 
that the WTO accession process I described with its benefits to 
U.S. business, labor, farmers, and ranchers will grind to a 
halt.
    Without China's accession to the WTO, the benefits of 
China's commitments in areas such as services and dispute 
settlements will be unavailable to U.S. companies. All of the 
tariff and tariff-rate quota concessions will be on hold.
    China's accession to WTO will be a benefit to China, of 
course, but it is not a favor to China. Major beneficiaries 
will be American companies, workers, and agriculture. It would 
significantly open the world's most populous country, and 
arguably the fastest growing economy in the world, to our 
exporters and service suppliers. Renewal of NTR is an essential 
step toward this objective.
    Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Bader follows:]

     Statement of Jeffrey A. Bader, Assistant United States Trade 
 Representative for China, Hong Kong, Mongolia, and Taiwan, Office of 
                 the United States Trade Representative

    Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to appear before this subcommittee today 
to discuss the benefits to the United States of renewing Normal Trade 
Relations (NTR) status for the People's Republic of China.
Relationship of NTR and China's WTO Accession
    China's NTR status has wider implications than merely the U.S.-
China trade relationship, as important as that is. My colleagues from 
the Departments of State and Commerce will discuss with this and other 
committees why the granting of Normal Trade Relations status is in the 
broad U.S. national interest and how it affects our global and regional 
security concerns, human rights, and religious freedom in China. My 
testimony will focus on the ongoing negotiations on China's accession 
into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the interplay between that 
issue and NTR status.
    Once China accedes to the WTO, pursuant to last year's legislation, 
permanent Normal Trade Relations status will become effective for 
China, provided the President sends the required certification to the 
Congress. This will obviate the need for a Jackson-Vanik waiver, annual 
renewal, and this annual debate. Thus, there is a statutory linkage 
between NTR status for China and its accession to the WTO.
    More broadly, China's accession to WTO will be a major and direct 
step forward in advancing some of the objectives that underlie our 
annual debate on NTR--assuring significantly greater market access for 
U.S. business, farmers, and ranchers to China's large and expanding 
market and encouraging the development of the rule of law in China.
The 1999 U.S.-China Bilateral Agreement
    The November 1999 U.S.-China Bilateral Agreement on China's 
accession to the WTO capped nearly fourteen years of intense, often 
difficult negotiations. It provided us with a set of comprehensive, 
verifiable, one-way trade concessions that substantially open China's 
market across the spectrum to U.S. goods, services, and agriculture. I 
want to acknowledge the tremendous efforts of Ambassador Barshefsky in 
achieving this result, and to note the bipartisan support for that 
Agreement and for the steps we have taken since.
Market Access
    This Subcommittee is familiar with the details of our bilateral 
agreement and there is no need to review them today. Suffice to say 
that, inter alia, under the 1999 Agreement China will:

   Reduce average tariff levels on goods of interest to the 
        United States from 24% to 7%,
   Phase-out all tariffs on Information Technology Products by 
        2005,
   Broadly open up its service sectors, such as insurance, 
        banking, securities, telecommunications, express mail, legal, 
        accounting, and computer-related services,
   Permit U.S. companies to operate wholesale, retail, and 
        franchised distribution networks.

    In addition, the associated April 1999 U.S.-China Agricultural 
Cooperation Agreement removed the bans on imports of U.S. citrus and 
wheat which were not based on sound scientific principles. This 
Agreement requires China to apply sanitary and phytosanitary measures 
consistent with sound scientific principles and to accept U.S. 
certification of meat products. With proper implementation, these 
requirements will be of particular benefit to U.S. growers of wheat and 
citrus products previously barred from China and should facilitate 
export of U.S. beef, pork and poultry products.
    Our growers, exporters, and ranchers have begun to take advantage 
of that opening. They will be able to capitalize on it much more fully 
once China accedes to the WTO, because the tariff reductions for all 
products and the new tariff rate quotas for wheat, corn, rice and 
cotton will only then take effect. U.S. agricultural exports to China, 
including Hong Kong, reached $3 billion in 2000. The U.S. Department of 
Agriculture estimates that China's membership in the WTO could result 
in $2 billion annually in additional U.S. agricultural exports by 2005.
Systemic Reforms
    In addition to improved market access, China has agreed to change 
practices that have made it difficult for U.S. companies to do business 
in China and hindered the development of China's economy. These broad-
based reforms include commitments to greater transparency in the 
operation of China's trade regime. Laws, regulations and other measures 
will be published before they are enforced and interested parties will 
have an opportunity to comment on these provisions before they are 
implemented. Administrative actions relating to trade matters will be 
subject to judicial review and China has agreed that the practices of 
all levels of government will comply with WTO requirements.
    China's membership in the WTO also requires compliance with 
international rules important in the day-by-day world of international 
trade. China has already begun the process of revising numerous laws 
and regulations on matters ranging from customs valuation and issuing 
import licenses to new patent and copyright laws. Beijing has been 
systematically reviewing and revising or abolishing laws and 
regulations inconsistent with WTO requirements. Work has also begun at 
the provincial level and in major cities, such as Shanghai.
    It is true that since 1999, we have experienced problems in our 
trade with China. As China continues the economic reforms it began two 
decades ago, certain segments of its government, particularly those in 
the state-owned or ``planned'' sectors of the economy, stand to lose 
influence. In cooperation with the Congress, Commerce and Agriculture 
Departments, other government agencies, industry and agriculture, and 
other governments, we will continue to engage the Chinese vigorously 
whenever we see such slippage.
Recent Developments: Shanghai and Geneva
    The 1999 agreements, critical though they were, did not mark the 
end of China's WTO accession process. Still to be completed was the 
negotiation of the multilateral documents essential to the accession 
package--the Protocol of Accession and the Working Party Report. These 
documents describe how WTO rules will apply to China and how China 
intends to implement the commitments it is undertaking in the area of 
goods, services and intellectual property rights. It is principally 
these negotiations that have occupied Ambassador Zoellick and our 
delegation, first in Shanghai last month and more recently at the 
Working Party meeting in Geneva last week. We also have negotiated 
improvements in and clarifications of some of the bilateral services 
schedules necessitated by ambiguities in China's laws and regulations.
    In Shanghai, Ambassador Zoellick negotiated the following 
improvements in China's accession package:

   An agreement on agricultural domestic support that limits 
        China's recourse to provisions of the WTO Agreement on 
        Agriculture to levels below that available to developing 
        countries.
   A commitment from China to assure that its restrictions on 
        chain stores do not inappropriately restrict the right of 
        American retailers to operate fully-owned distribution outlets.
   A commitment from China on how it will allow foreign 
        companies, including those from the United States, to export to 
        China on a nondiscriminatory, non-discretionary basis without 
        burdensome requirements.
   A phase-out of the current requirement for mandatory cession 
        of 20% of premiums to China's reinsurance state monopoly.
   Broader opportunities for U.S. insurance companies to 
        provide large-scale commercial risk insurance.

    In Geneva this past week, we obtained multilateral endorsement of 
these achievements. In addition, we achieved international consensus on 
Working Party Report provisions on numerous issues crucial to assuring 
market access and fair trade with China--inter alia, technical barriers 
to trade (standards), anti-dumping, safeguards, administration of 
tariff-rate quotas, intellectual property rights, industrial subsidies, 
and the transitional mechanism to monitor China's implementation of its 
commitments.
    I want to make a few additional points about China's WTO 
commitments:

   First, our agreements will reduce China's trade barriers 
        across a broad range of goods, services, and agricultural 
        products, eliminate or significantly reduce restrictions on 
        freedom to import and distribute goods within China, and 
        rectify industrial policies intended to draw jobs and 
        technology to China.
   Second, China's commitments are effective immediately upon 
        accession. China will be required to take concrete steps to 
        open its market from day one in virtually every sector. The 
        phase-in of further concessions will be limited to five years 
        in almost all cases, and in many cases to three years.
   Third, the agreements are enforceable. China's commitments 
        are specific, with timetables and dates for staged and full 
        implementation. We will enforce them through our trade laws, 
        WTO dispute settlement processes, as necessary, and other 
        mechanisms including an annual multilateral review of China's 
        implementation and compliance for eight years, with an 
        additional review in the tenth year. We intend to set up a 
        network to help us identify and act upon problems as early as 
        possible, drawing on the assets of our Embassy and Consulates 
        in China, the Departments of Commerce and Agriculture, and the 
        American Chambers of Commerce in China and the region. At USTR, 
        we have added two people to what was a four-person China office 
        and one attorney to our General Counsel's office, all of whom 
        will focus on monitoring and implementation efforts.
   Fourth, the agreement helps ensure that trade with China 
        does not injure U.S. industry and workers. The special anti-
        dumping provision we negotiated allows us to use non-market 
        economy methodology in judging prices of imports from China for 
        15 years. The special safeguards provision and the procedures 
        in our PNTR legislation allow the United States to act quickly 
        to address rapidly increasing imports from China that disrupt 
        our market and cause material injury to a U.S. industry. Under 
        this provision we can take action against imports only from 
        China instead of restricting imports from all WTO Members. For 
        textile and apparel products, the accession package includes a 
        special safeguard mirroring our current practice in this area. 
        Our textile and apparel industry will be able to use this 
        safeguard until January 1, 2009.
   Fifth, the increased transparency and accountability that 
        WTO Membership and implementation of WTO rules compel can only 
        have a positive effect in other areas. The essence of the WTO 
        is that it is a rules-based system that requires its members in 
        turn to play by the rules--with the openness and transparency 
        in rule-making and rule-enforcement I noted earlier. Its 
        provisions and philosophy stress the central role of markets 
        and private enterprise. The reforms China is undertaking to 
        conform to WTO rules will provide the basis for further 
        liberalization in China.

Remaining Steps
    It appears we are nearing the end game in this accession process. 
China has completed the negotiation of all its bilateral agreements 
except with Mexico and Central America, with which it has been 
negotiating intensively. Along with our other trading partners, we are 
in the process of verifying and rectifying each of the commitments 
China has made in its various bilateral agreements to assure the most 
liberalizing one makes it into the final accession documents.
    I will be going back to Geneva with my delegation this weekend for 
another Working Party meeting whose objective will be to produce a 
completed Protocol of Accession, a Working Party Report with as few 
unresolved issues as possible, and final consolidated schedules on 
goods and services. If we are successful, this package will be sent to 
capitals for review. It is possible that early in the fall, what we 
hope will be the final Working Party session will convene to approve 
final texts of all these documents.
    The full accession package will be reviewed by Ambassador Zoellick 
and other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government. After that review, 
the President will decide whether he can certify to the Congress, as 
required in the PNTR legislation, that the final package is at least 
equivalent to the bilateral agreement negotiated in 1999. It is our 
objective to produce a final package that meets that standard.
    If the President is able to provide such a certification and other 
countries provide similar approvals, WTO members, at a meeting of the 
General Council or possibly at the WTO Ministerial meeting at Doha, 
would then approve the terms of China's accession to the WTO. China 
will then need to complete its domestic approval process and formally 
accept WTO membership. China will become a WTO member after filing its 
formal acceptance with the WTO.
    A final point: we fully expect the WTO to approve Taiwan's 
accession in the same time frame as China's. As a major player in 
international trade and a new and thriving democracy, Taiwan deserves 
membership and a larger role in the international community. We have 
discussed our expectations on Taiwan's accession thoroughly with all 
the concerned parties and are confident there is a consensus on this.

The Stakes
    If we fail to grant NTR status to China, it is predictable that the 
WTO accession process I have described, with its benefits to U.S. 
business, labor, farmers, and ranchers, will grind to a halt. In such a 
scenario, we can expect to fall into a cycle of retaliation and 
counter-retaliation with the Chinese, with markets closing rather than 
opening and sales, and jobs, going to U.S. competitors.
    As was clear in last year's debate on PNTR, without China's 
accession to the WTO, the benefits of China's commitments in areas such 
as services and dispute settlement will be unavailable to U.S. 
companies. All of the tariff and tariff-rate quota concessions will be 
on hold. The livelihoods of the 400,000 American workers and farmers 
employed in or benefiting from America's trade with China will be 
affected.
    China's accession to WTO will be a benefit to China, of course, but 
it is not a favor to China. Indeed, it contains the most rigorous and 
broad-ranging commitments ever required of a new member to the GATT or 
WTO. Major beneficiaries will be American companies, workers, and 
agriculture. It would significantly open the world's most populous 
country, and arguably the fastest-growing economy in the world, to our 
exporters and service suppliers. Renewal of NTR is an essential step 
toward this objective.
    I look forward to your questions.