Introduction
    Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Herger and distinguished members of 
the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Trade, I am delighted to be able to 
participate in the first of what I understand is to be a series of 
hearings on U.S.-China trade relations. As the Deputy U.S. Trade 
Representative with principal responsibility for our Asian and African 
trade relationships, I can tell you that there are few subjects that I 
deal with that are more important or more complex than our relationship 
with China, and I'm very pleased that this subcommittee is devoting 
time to this subject.
    I understand that today's hearing is focused principally on two 
topics: (i) subsidies and (ii) the enforcement of intellectual property 
rights. I will touch on both subjects. But, especially because this is 
the first of a number of hearings that the Subcommittee intends to 
conduct, I thought it might be helpful to provide a brief overview of 
the U.S.-China trade relationship generally and developments in that 
relationship over the past 12 months.
Top-to-Bottom Review
    One year ago yesterday, USTR issued a comprehensive, interagency 
``Top-to-Bottom Review'' (``T2B'' or ``Review'') of U.S.-China trade 
relations. That Review observed the policy of economic engagement the 
U.S. has pursued with China for the past 25 years--on a largely 
bipartisan basis across administrations--has benefited both countries. 
The Review also noted that, after a period in which U.S. trade policy 
was largely focused on bringing China into the international trading 
system and urging China to implement its new WTO commitments during a 
transition period, the relationship is now entering an important new 
phase--one in which China will be held fully accountable for its WTO 
obligations as a mature trading partner and will be expected to play a 
greater role in strengthening the global trading system commensurate 
with its economic heft and the economic benefits it receives. The 
Review urged, as we enter this new period, the readjustment of U.S. 
trade resources and priorities with respect to China--in favor of 
enhanced use of enforcement tools and more focused, coordinated and 
senior-level dialogue.
    The T2B set forth a number of key objectives: (i) strengthening the 
focus on China's WTO compliance and adherence to international norms, 
(ii) ensuring that the bilateral trade relationship offers more 
balanced opportunities and is equitable and durable, (iii) making U.S. 
trade policymaking more proactive and informed by more comprehensive 
information and more coordination, (iv) encouraging China to 
participate more fully in the global trading system, and (v) ensuring 
that the United States remains an active and influential economic and 
trading power in the Asia Pacific region. The T2B also set forth a 
detailed list of steps to achieve those objectives.
Top-to-Bottom Review_Implementation
    Looking back over the past year, I am pleased to report that, after 
the opportunity to consult with Congress, we have moved full-steam 
ahead to implement the recommendations laid out in the T2B. Let me run 
through a few:

      We demonstrated our willingness to use WTO dispute 
settlement to hold China to its commitments. Under Ambassadors Portman 
and Schwab, we filed WTO cases on China's discriminatory treatment of 
imported auto parts and use of prohibited subsidies. And we were on the 
verge of filing a third case last year, challenging China's antidumping 
order against U.S. exports of Kraft Linerboard, when China rescinded 
that order just hours before our filing.
      In April 2006, we held a meeting of the Joint Commission 
on Commerce and Trade (JCCT). At that meeting, we obtained Chinese 
commitments to address a number of concerns about access to China's 
market, transparency, and enforcement of intellectual property rights. 
President Bush also had an opportunity to discuss important economic 
issues with President Hu Jintao during his visit to the United States.
      In September, President Bush launched a new high-level 
dialogue to address critical economic issues--the Strategic Economic 
Dialogue (SED). The first SED meeting was held in Beijing in December, 
and we have been pushing forward with a number of specific follow-up 
discussions in anticipation of the next SED meeting here in May. To 
further bolster the initiative, Secretary Paulson recently announced 
that Treasury has appointed Ambassador Alan Holmer as Special Envoy to 
China overseeing the SED process.
      We have launched a new and unprecedented provincial level 
review of China's IPR enforcement efforts, and look forward to 
publishing the results later this Spring.
      We have held dozens of sector--or issue-specific 
negotiations with the Chinese in areas ranging from beef to 
telecommunications, as we seek to ensure that China continues to open 
its markets and honor its commitments.
      We have held 61 meetings or briefings with Congress over 
the past year regarding our China trade relationship and have regularly 
consulted on such topics as our WTO litigation strategy, the JCCT 
dialogue, and the SED.
      We have created a senior-level China Task Force within 
our Advisory Committee on Trade Policy and Negotiations.
      We have established new channels of communication with 
our third country trading partners to coordinate trade policy with 
respect to China.
      And at USTR, over the past year, we have substantially 
strengthened our China-focused resources, with the creation of the 
position of Chief Counsel for China Trade Enforcement, the creation of 
a China Enforcement Task Force, the addition of new staff in our China 
Office, and the hiring of a new USTR attache in Beijing.

    These and the many other actions we have taken to implement the T2B 
strategy over the past year have been important, both individually and 
collectively. They demonstrate to U.S. stakeholders, to China, and to 
our other trading partners that we have a carefully crafted strategy 
for engaging China on trade matters, and that we have been following 
it.
    Of course, both the T2B and the actions taken to implement it are 
means to an end, not an end in itself. The end is a trade relationship 
with China that is more balanced in the opportunities it offers, more 
equitable and more durable. Such a relationship will not be achieved 
within the span of a mere 12 months. But I am pleased to say that there 
are some encouraging signs. Let me point to three:

      Based on the results just reported by the Commerce 
Department, U.S. exports to China last year climbed by 32 percent. (By 
contrast, I would note that China's exports to the U.S. increased by 18 
percent.) This suggests that the Chinese market is becoming more 
accessible for American companies, and that Chinese consumers are 
developing an appetite for America's highly competitive goods and 
services. China today has become our fourth largest export market, and 
the fastest growing major export market for the United States in the 
world. It is helping to support thousands of American jobs today and 
will support even more in the future.
      In its 2006 annual survey of members, the U.S.-China 
Business Council reported that 81 percent of members surveyed reported 
that their Chinese operations are profitable (with more than half 
saying that profitability rates for their China operations meet or 
exceed global profit margins) and 97 percent of respondents saying that 
they are optimistic about prospects for their China business over the 
next five years.
      There have been a number of important transactions that 
have helped to further open the Chinese market to U.S. companies--
including the acquisition of a stake in Guangdong Development Bank by 
Citibank, the selection of Westinghouse for a $5-8 billion nuclear 
power contract, and the signing of over 100 purchase agreements and 
contracts worth over $16 billion in advance of President Hu Jintao's 
visit to the United States last April.

    In citing these positive developments, I do not mean to suggest 
that all is well in the U.S.-China economic relationship. Significant 
challenges remain. In particular, as detailed in the 2006 Report to 
Congress on China's WTO compliance that USTR issued last December, we 
are concerned by signs that China could seek to slow down or pull back 
from the market-oriented and WTO-consistent changes they have been 
making in their economy and pursue more state interventionist or 
mercantilist policies. A retreat from continued reform would slow 
China's own economic development, dampen U.S export growth, preclude 
the leveling of imbalances, and breed frustrations. So, working to 
ensure that China does not slow down or retreat from reform is a key 
objective.
    Let me now turn to the two specific topics at issue here today--
subsidies and IPR--and briefly discuss the most recent developments in 
our dealings with the China on these two topics.
Subsidies
    In testimony last year before the Senate Finance Committee, I 
observed that the Chinese Government's role in directing the Chinese 
economy, including through the use of subsidies, was one of the 
principal concerns of USTR. The way we have approached this issue over 
the past twelve months is entirely consistent with the

strategy laid out in the T2B--we are confronting this serious challenge 
using both enforcement levers as well as dialogue.
    As you know, just two weeks ago we announced that the United States 
has requested consultations at the WTO over what we contend is China's 
persistent use of prohibited subsidies. Basically, the United States 
believes that China uses its tax laws and other tools to encourage 
exports and to discriminate against imports of a variety of 
manufactured goods. The subsidies at issue in this case are offered 
across a broad array of industry sectors in China--including steel, 
wood products, information technology, and others.
    It is an important case--important because it challenges policies 
that are tilting the playing field against our workers and companies, 
important because it makes clear that we will use WTO dispute 
settlement procedures to hold China to its commitments where dialogue 
does not resolve our concerns, and--perhaps most of all--important 
because it will help impel China to maintain a process of reform and to 
redirect its economy towards a model of consumption-led, rather than 
export-led, growth.
    While we have filed this WTO case, we continue to engage in 
dialogue with the Chinese on their use of subsidies. These discussions 
are happening both at the sector-specific level--for example, our 
recently created ``Steel Dialogue'' under the JCCT is enabling a 
conversation among governments and industries of both sides--as well as 
in connection with our broader economic dialogues, including the 
Strategic Economic Dialogue. Industrial policies that limit market 
access for non-Chinese origin goods and that provide substantial 
government resources to support Chinese industries also remain a 
concern.
    Finally, although it does not fall within USTR's statutory purview, 
I should note that the Department of Commerce continues to apply U.S. 
trade remedy laws to ensure that unfair trade practices, whether 
undertaken by the Chinese or others, do not distort the playing field 
against U.S. companies.
IPR Enforcement
    The Administration is similarly employing a dual-track approach in 
the area of intellectual property rights. The rampant infringement of 
intellectual property rights that persists in China, in spite of 
efforts by central government officials to move against illegal 
practices, not only robs U.S. businesses of billions of dollars a year 
in legitimate sales, it also weakens China's development of its own 
knowledge-based industries.
    Over the past year, we have been working to prepare a WTO case that 
challenges China's compliance with its WTO obligations in the area of 
intellectual property rights enforcement. Last October, we informed 
China that we would be filing such a case, but then agreed to hold off, 
with the support of U.S. industry, when China asked for further 
bilateral discussion. We have been holding those discussions, including 
late last month in Beijing. We have also been raising with China 
restrictions on market access. While these are not IPR issues per se, 
they have a negative impact on the industries depending on intellectual 
property, such as the copyright industry and, to a certain extent, they 
exacerbate some of the problems with IPR enforcement. Thus far, no 
settlement has been reached. We are consulting with Congress and with 
industry on next steps. If we believe that negotiations offer a 
reasonable chance of success, we will continue to pursue them--a 
successfully negotiated outcome can be more efficient and as successful 
as a litigated outcome. But if it becomes clear that negotiations will 
not be successful, then we will proceed with WTO dispute settlement.
    In the interim, of course, we continue to try to work with China 
through various other avenues to address this serious problem. For 
example, under Special 301, we are conducting a special review of 
enforcement at the provincial and municipal levels of government where 
much of the responsibility for day-to-day enforcement lies. We are also 
continuing to press China to make improvements in its IP system through 
the JCCT and SED.
    It bears noting that at the highest levels of the Chinese 
government there is a clearly stated commitment to tackle this problem. 
In his remarks from the South Lawn of the White House in April, 
President Hu affirmed that China is committed to ``strengthening the 
protection of intellectual property rights.'' China's leadership 
appears to recognize that the development of a more vigorous and 
effective IPR enforcement system is critical not only to trade 
relations with the United States, but also to China's own economic 
development. The challenge confronting China is turning those stated 
commitments into real results.
    Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to take 
your questions.
