Ms. SHINER. Thank you Chairman Thomas, Congressman Crane, 
Ranking Member Rangel, and Members of the Committee. I welcome 
this opportunity to testify regarding U.S.-China economic 
relations, China's role in the global economy, and our trade 
relationship with China.
    I have just returned from the second of two trips to China 
this month where I delivered the simple message: China must 
increase the openness of its market and treat U.S. goods and 
services in a fair and transparent manner if it wants to 
maintain support of the United States for an open market with 
China.
    To address these areas, we are focused on three fronts: 
ensuring that China meets its WTO commitments and gets the 
fundamentals right as it moves to a rules-based economy; 
ensuring that our businesses and farmers exporting to China are 
treated in a fair and transparent manner; and ensuring that 
China effectively addresses the rampant pirating for domestic 
consumption and export of American ideas and innovations. What 
our producers and manufacturers and farmers want--what they are 
entitled to--are fair and consistent rules and a level playing 
field.
    Last week, Ambassador Zoellick made his fifth trip to China 
as the USTR. Since my appointment in August, I have met with 
top officials in more than a dozen Chinese agencies to address 
outstanding issues and concerns. In addition to many meetings, 
last week Ambassador Zoellick and I met with Vice Premier Wu Yi 
where we emphasized the vital importance of meeting WTO 
commitments and addressing piracy issues.
    I will return to Beijing in 2 weeks to lead the U.S. 
delegation in our second trade dialog with China this year, 
where we will address the range of our bilateral concerns. In 
addition, I will hold specialized meetings there with my 
counterparts to express our concerns regarding IPR enforcement 
and participate in the Ambassador's IPR Roundtable which will 
bring together the U.S. and the Chinese government and private 
sector officials.
    In addition, Ambassador Zoellick, Secretary Snow, and 
Secretary Evans, who has just departed from Beijing, will 
continue to take advantage of additional opportunities to 
engage in a lead-up to Premier Wen Jiabao's visit to Washington 
in December.
    To put the U.S.-China trade relationship in context, it 
should be noted that there are areas of achievement. Many U.S. 
manufacturers, service suppliers, and agricultural exporters 
report that China's large and growing market is their top area 
of growth. Companies such as General Motors import into China 
hundreds of millions of dollars of U.S. goods to meet consumer 
demand there, benefiting American workers and contributing to 
the company's overall strength. Indeed, less than 2 years after 
China's accession to the WTO, China has become our fourth 
largest trading partner and sixth largest market for U.S. 
exports.
    In our trade with China, the United States ran a surplus of 
$1.1 billion in agricultural trade in 2002, and that surplus is 
projected to rise to $3.5 billion in 2003. The United States 
also runs surpluses with China in services trade, which was 
almost $2 billion last year. We have also seen growth over the 
past 3 years in U.S. exports to China of a number of 
manufactured products. Sales of machinery and electrical 
machinery have doubled over that period to $9.6 billion through 
the 12 months ending August 2003. We have also run a surplus in 
iron and steel. We sold nearly $1 billion of iron and steel to 
China in the 12 months through August of this year--an increase 
of well over 400 percent from 3 years ago.
    Despite areas of progress, our deficit with China is our 
largest with any country, and it is growing. There is 
increasing concern in the United States and among our other 
trading partners that there are serious lapses in China's 
enforcement of its WTO commitments. Let us briefly review the 
current status of these issues, where we have made progress, 
and where we need to continue to press.
    On WTO implementation, over the past 22 months China has 
taken many positive and sometimes difficult steps to meet its 
WTO commitments. It has implemented thousands of tariff 
reductions on schedule. It has reviewed and revised thousands 
of laws and regulations and established new transparency 
procedures and many national and sub-national agencies.
    While much progress has been made, China's record of WTO 
implementation is too fraught with inconsistencies, delays, and 
enforcement weaknesses to demonstrate clear progress toward the 
rule of law. We are working with China on specific areas of 
concern, such as agricultural trade barriers, restrictions on 
the right of American firms to import and distribute products 
and services, and identifying the importance of upcoming 
commitments.
    In the area of fairness in market access, China early on 
enacted a series of laws and regulations to protect patents, 
brands, and copyrights that are viewed as trade-related aspects 
of intellectual property rights (TRIPS) compliant by our 
industry. China's conspicuous failure to effectively enforce 
their laws and to enact deterrent penalties has made U.S. 
companies vulnerable to rampant counterfeiting and piracy. This 
is greatly undermining China's credibility as a fair market and 
threatening their own efforts to develop knowledge in 
innovation industries.
    During our meetings, China pledged to address these issues 
at the highest levels and has put Vice Minister Wu Yi in charge 
of a leading group responsible to get this issue under control. 
We consider this an important step, given her standing in the 
leadership, her expertise on trade, and her effectiveness in 
dealing with the severe acute respiratory syndrome crisis when 
charged with bringing that under control. We will be working 
with her directly to identify best practices, vulnerabilities 
in their systems, and to help with training and capacity-
building as they move to effectively enforce their laws.
    We are aware that many U.S. firms, such as those in 
Congresswoman Johnson's district that are being threatened by 
pirating of their product, feel that they cannot wait for China 
to get the fundamentals right in this area. We know that many 
small- and medium-sized companies such as Zippo lighters do not 
have the resources to effectively investigate violations of 
their brands on the ground in China. To address their immediate 
concerns and yours, we have secured a commitment from our 
counterparts in China to investigate individual cases brought 
to their attention. We urge you to alert us to specific IPR 
problems, and we will work closely with you to address those 
problems with China.
    We also highlighted other fairness concerns by conveying 
the frustrations of many U.S. service providers with China's 
restrictive regulations and U.S. exporters' concerns regarding 
China's apparently discriminatory value-added tax (VAT) 
policies. We have put China on notice that we do not feel that 
some of their VAT programs are WTO-compliant. I will seek to 
determine in November whether we can expect to have our 
concerns addressed.
    On fair and transparent standards and regulations, as it 
implements its WTO requirements, we are urging China to build a 
transparent, open, and fair regulatory environment. In some 
sectors our companies report that they are seeing excellent 
improvements in the development of regulations; but in others, 
companies are frustrated with their attempts. In agriculture, 
we have pressed China to use only science-based sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) measures. We are expressing the importance 
of regulating with technology neutrality, citing areas such as 
the wireless 3G field and the need for a fair approach in areas 
like basic versus value-added telecom services and automobile 
industrial policy.
    In the area of enforcement of our trade remedies, as stated 
already, as a condition of China's entry into the WTO, China 
agreed to two separate China-specific safeguard mechanisms to 
allow WTO Members to cope with market disruptions caused by 
increasing economic integration with China. When our industry 
faces injurious trade with China, the Administration is fully 
committed to enforcing U.S. trade remedy laws and to exercising 
the important rights that the United States has under China's 
WTO accession agreement. To this end, the Administration has 
imposed duties under U.S. antidumping and safeguard laws 
against a range of products from China.
    We have also raised the question of better cooperation on 
international economic issues, including in the WTO. We have 
had frank discussions with China on the progress of the Doha 
Development Agenda and will continue to engage China in an 
effort to promote our common areas of interest. China was a 
Member of the G-21 at a recent WTO Ministerial meeting in 
Cancun, Mexico. However, China also made some constructive 
interventions during those meetings, and as a Member of the 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) it has agreed with all 
other APEC Members that WTO Members should build on the Cancun 
text of September 13, 2003, which was a positive development.
    Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, thank you for this 
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Shiner follows:]
 Statement of the Honorable Josette Sheeran Shiner, Deputy U.S. Trade 
        Representative, Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
    Mr. Chairman, I welcome this opportunity to testify regarding U.S.-
China economic relations and China's role in the global economy. I have 
just returned from the second of two trips to China this month, where I 
delivered this simple message: China must increase the openness of its 
market and treat U.S. goods and services in a fair and transparent 
manner, if it wants to maintain support in the United States for an 
open market with China.
    During the last three weeks, I met with my counterpart at the 
Ministry of Commerce and with high-level officials from several other 
ministries to address critical U.S.-China economic and trade issues in 
the run-up to the October 19 meeting between Presidents Bush and Hu. I 
accompanied Ambassador Zoellick to the APEC Ministerial, where we 
bluntly and directly addressed these issues with Executive Vice 
Minister of Commerce Yu Guangzhou. I traveled with Ambassador Zoellick 
to Beijing for a meeting with Vice Premier Wu Yi, where we emphasized 
the vital importance of improving access to Chinese markets for U.S. 
manufacturers, service suppliers, agricultural exporters and their 
workers. And, we met with Governor Bo Xilai from Liaoning Province in 
Northeast China to discuss ways to increase agricultural trade and to 
improve intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement.
    I will return to Beijing in mid-November to lead the U.S. 
delegation in our second Trade Dialogue with China this year, where we 
will address the range of our bilateral trade concerns. In addition, I 
will hold meetings there with my counterparts to press our concerns 
about IPR enforcement, and participate in the Ambassador's IPR 
roundtable, which will bring together U.S. and Chinese government and 
private sector officials.
    The Administration attaches great importance to improving China's 
openness to U.S. goods and services as a basis for building a healthy 
trading relationship. China's large and growing market offers 
tremendous potential for U.S. manufacturers, service suppliers and 
agricultural exporters. Indeed, less than two years after China's 
accession to the World Trade Organization, China has become our fourth 
largest trading partner and the sixth largest market for U.S. exports. 
We sold $22 billion in goods to China in 2002--up from $9.3 billion in 
1994--and we should exceed last year's figure by more than 20 percent 
in 2003. Perhaps more significantly, exports to China have grown some 
62 percent in the last three years, while U.S. exports to the world 
have declined by 9 percent over the same period. We are working to 
ensure that strong U.S.-China economic and trade ties benefit U.S. 
workers, farmers and ranchers.
    Despite growing U.S. exports, our largest bilateral goods trade 
deficit is with China--and that deficit continues to grow. It stood at 
$103 billion last year and is running at an annualized rate of $125 
billion so far this year. China will represent between 21 and 22 
percent of our overall goods trade deficit with the world this year, 
like last year.
    But while the bilateral deficit is large, it is worth putting those 
numbers into context. It should be noted, for example, that:

      Within the overall goods deficit, the United States ran a 
surplus of $1.1 billion in agricultural trade in 2002, and that surplus 
is projected to rise to $3.5 billion in 2003. The United States also 
runs surpluses in services trade. Last year, the services trade surplus 
with China was just under $2 billion.
      Much of the import increase from China has come at the 
expense of other Asian countries. In fact, when goods imports from 
China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan are combined, they actually represent a 
smaller share of U.S. global goods imports than they did in 1990, 
falling from 29 percent to 27 percent of the U.S. import market.
      China's economy is relatively open to imports. Imports as 
a share of GDP are 22.8 percent in China, 11.2 percent in the United 
States and 7.6 percent in Japan.
      And, as the National Association of Manufacturers and 
others have pointed out, imports are not bad for the U.S. economy. 
Goods that can be produced more efficiently in other countries provide 
a broad range of products to industry and consumers that enhance our 
standard of living.

    The Administration is determined to continue to address market 
access problems that contribute to the deficit. Our markets are 
certainly open to exports from Chinese companies, and we need to ensure 
that China operates with fair, transparent and predictable rules when 
it comes to our companies' access to China's market. That means, most 
importantly, that China must live up to the commitments that it made 
upon joining the WTO. We also need to ensure that China engages in fair 
trade when it comes to its exports to the United States. Our companies 
want, and are entitled to, a level playing field.
    The areas we have been pressing are:

      WTO implementation, including implementation of China's 
obligations to open its agricultural market and provide for full 
liberalization of trading rights and distribution services;
      Fairness in market access, such as providing for 
effective enforcement of intellectual property rights, lifting 
excessive restrictions on financial services firms, and non-
discriminatory value-added tax policies;
      Fair and transparent standards and regulations, including 
science-based sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technology 
neutrality for new high technology products;
      Better cooperation on the international economic issues, 
including in the WTO; and
      Enforcement of U.S. trade remedies.
China's Implementation of its WTO Committments
    China's accession to the World Trade Organization on December 11, 
2001 was one of the most anticipated and hotly debated subjects in 
international economics of the last decade. By joining the WTO, China 
committed to a sweeping series of market-opening reforms that will 
require a fundamental shift in China's economy. While China had, for 
over two decades, been moving from a command economy to a more market-
oriented economy, China's WTO accession was meant to be the crescendo 
to this movement.
    For the United States, accepting China into the WTO served a number 
of purposes. The accession provided an opportunity to negotiate a 
favorable package of tariff cuts and the elimination of many non-tariff 
measures to open China's market to U.S. farmers, manufacturers, workers 
and service providers. China's WTO accession also subjects China to the 
same rigorous trade rules by which the United States and all other WTO 
members operate. The WTO has, for the United States, served as a 
valuable forum at which to address trade concerns with China. While we 
have yet to initiate dispute resolution proceedings against China, the 
United States has frequently used both formal and informal consultative 
mechanisms to achieve progress on many issues of concern to the United 
States. Indeed, the progress we have made toward resolving concerns 
with China's trading practices through such mechanisms is the primary 
reason we have not had to resort to WTO dispute resolution or other 
measures.
    Of course, there are forces in China, as elsewhere, that are 
resistant to the changes wrought by WTO implementation. Despite the 
best of intentions by many Chinese officials, these forces have not 
been unsuccessful in limiting China's progress toward the goals the 
United States and other WTO members foresaw through China's WTO 
accession. As a result, China's market for U.S. goods and services is 
not as open as it should be, our engagement with China in the WTO has 
not been as useful as it should be, and China's record of WTO 
implementation is too fraught with inconsistencies to allow definitive 
statements on Chinese progress toward the rule of law.
    Over the past 22 months, China has taken many positive and 
sometimes difficult steps to meet its WTO commitments. China has 
completed much of the nuts-and-bolts work of WTO implementation by 
reviewing thousands of laws and regulations and making necessary 
revisions to effect its WTO commitments, and by establishing new 
transparency procedures in many national and sub-national agencies. It 
has also reduced tariffs to their committed levels, and has begun the 
process of removing market access barriers affecting a wide range of 
goods and services sectors.
    China's potential as a market for U.S. exports of bulk agricultural 
commodities was a key factor in U.S. support for China's WTO accession 
and grant of Permanent Normal Trade Relations status to China. While 
bumper harvests of some crops in China in 2002 may have limited the 
commercial potential of some U.S. exports, China's attempts to restrict 
certain agricultural imports has been a recurring problem since China's 
WTO accession. The use of--or even the threat to use--questionable GMO 
standards and sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures to restrict 
imports of some products for alleged health and safety concerns has 
frustrated efforts of U.S. agriculture traders, most notably in the 
case of soybeans. In the case of those bulk agricultural commodities 
subject to negotiated tariff-rate quotas (TRQs) in China, the setting 
of sub-quotas, use of burdensome import licensing procedures, 
allocation of TRQs in commercially unviable quantities and a lack of 
transparency in TRQ allocation and management have restricted what 
should be a ready market for U.S. exports, particularly wheat, corn and 
cotton.
    After the efforts of Ambassador Zoellick, Agriculture Secretary 
Veneman and others in the Administration, the commercial impact of 
these potential barriers was contained. U.S. exports of soybeans topped 
$1.2 billion--a record--and cotton sales were already 8-10 times 
greater than in any previous calendar year by July, 2003. In fact, as 
noted earlier, we are actually running a surplus with China in the 
agricultural area, which is projected to triple to $3.5 billion in 
2003. Chinese officials have assured us that systemic problems with 
both GMO and SPS regulation will be addressed, and a negotiated 
settlement to our concerns with China's TRQ system is in progress. 
However, until solutions are successfully implemented, these issues 
will hang like a cloud over the marketplace. These and other emerging 
concerns will require continued vigilance and engagement by the 
Administration in order to ensure fair competition and market access 
for U.S. goods.
    With regard to China's future WTO implementation, the top concern 
of many U.S. industries involves trading rights and distribution 
services. These were key areas for WTO members when negotiating the 
terms of China's entry into the WTO. Within three years after its WTO 
accession, or by December 11, 2004, China agreed to make trading rights 
automatically available, which means that U.S. businesses will be able 
to import and export goods on their own, without having to use Chinese 
trading companies. By that same time, China also agreed to fully open 
up the distribution services sector, which will allow U.S. companies to 
sell their goods freely in China, without being required to turn the 
job over to Chinese wholesalers and retailers or establish a joint 
venture with a Chinese enterprise. In the interim, China agreed to 
progressively liberalize in these areas pursuant to timetables set out 
in its accession agreement. So far, however, while China has begun the 
required liberalization, it has imposed stringent conditions, which 
have greatly limited the number of enterprises eligible to take 
advantage of the intermediate liberalization. China's ``go slow'' 
approach also raises concern that China will not complete full 
implementation of its commitments in these areas on a timely basis. The 
Administration is actively engaged with China on these issues--most 
recently in Ambassador Zoellick's meeting with Vice Premier Wu Yi--and 
has made clear its views on the importance of China's full and timely 
implementation of this important commitment.
Fairness in Market Access
    In our meeting earlier this month with Vice Premier Wu Yi, 
Ambassador Zoellick and I stressed the importance of not just 
predictability and consistency but also fairness in the rules governing 
access to China's market. We explained that China's conspicuous failure 
to effectively address rampant counterfeiting and piracy greatly 
undermines China's credibility as a fair market. We also highlighted 
other fairness concerns by conveying the frustrations of many U.S. 
service providers with China's restrictive regulations and U.S. 
exporters' concerns regarding China's apparently discriminatory value-
added tax (VAT) policies.
    In the year leading up to WTO accession, China made significant 
improvements to its framework of laws and regulations protecting 
patents, copyrights, trademarks and other intellectual property rights. 
However, the lack of effective IPR enforcement in China is a major 
obstacle toward a meaningful system of IPR protection. IPR problems run 
the gamut, from rampant piracy of film and other entertainment 
products, to sophisticated software and semiconductor products, to 
counterfeiting of consumer goods, electrical equipment, automotive 
parts and pharmaceuticals. IPR infringements not only have an economic 
toll, but they also present a direct challenge to China's ability to 
regulate those products that have health and safety implications for 
China's population and international purchasers of such products. While 
a domestic Chinese business constituency is increasingly active in 
promoting IPR protection for self-interested reasons, the problem is 
immensely widespread. If significant improvements are to be achieved on 
this front, China will have to devote considerable resources and 
political will to this problem, and there will continue to be a need 
for sustained efforts from the United States and other WTO members.
    We understand that Madame Wu Yi will be leading a new and more 
focused effort by China to tackle the IPR enforcement problem.  In the 
view of the Administration, the key to making concrete progress on IPR 
enforcement will be for China to demonstrate a clear commitment to 
fight piracy at the highest levels, to increase deterrent-level 
criminal penalties for IPR violators, to show a willingness to increase 
prosecution and punishment of IPR offenders, to lower thresholds for 
criminal prosecution, to increase resources and devote more training 
for enforcement in all parts of China, and to establish more effective 
communication procedures between relevant officials of China's courts 
and investigative units, the Supreme People's Procuratorate and China's 
lawmaking bodies. I will continue to press our concerns in this 
important area later this month in meetings with my Chinese 
counterparts and with representatives of the U.S. and Chinese private 
sectors.
    In the services area, several sectors have generated concerns, 
particularly regarding China's use of capitalization requirements that 
exceed international norms. The United States and China have had 
reasonably cooperative talks to resolve these concerns in many of the 
affected sectors, but progress has been slow and at times frustrating. 
Other issues, however, such as implementation of China's commitments on 
branching by insurance companies, the United States and China remain at 
odds. In addition, even when we have made progress toward resolving 
concerns with trade-restrictive regulations, as in the case of express 
courier services, we have sometimes had to revisit problematic issues 
in subsequently proposed measures.
    Meanwhile, China has increasingly used VAT policies to encourage 
domestic industrial or agricultural production in a number of sectors. 
In the case of semiconductors, China's policy of providing rebates of 
VAT to domestic semiconductor producers disadvantages U.S. exports and 
raises significant WTO compliance concerns. In the case of fertilizer, 
China exempts from the VAT fertilizers that compete directly with the 
principal U.S. fertilizer export, a practice that is difficult to 
justify under WTO rules. In addition, we also have received reports 
about questionable tax policies used to promote exports of domestically 
produced agricultural goods, including corn. The Administration has 
engaged China on all these practices, and will continue to pursue the 
elimination of discriminatory or trade-distorting VAT policies through 
appropriate channels in Beijing, Washington and Geneva.
Fair and Transparent Standards and Regulations
    One important incentive behind U.S. support for China's WTO 
accession was the role we foresaw WTO implementation would play in 
promoting transparency and the development of the rule of law in China. 
Indeed, in the first year of its WTO membership alone, China issued, 
modified or repealed more than one thousand laws and regulations to 
conform with WTO requirements. A China that plays by the rules of 
international trade, promotes more accountable government and is 
building a transparent, open and fair regulatory environment is a China 
that all Americans want to see.
    While China has made significant progress in revising its legal 
framework, other problems have persisted. In particular, China has a 
poor record of providing opportunities for public comment on draft laws 
and regulations. In addition, many of the regulatory measures that 
China has adopted have been issued without advance notice and, in some 
cases, have unfairly prejudiced foreign companies and their goods and 
services.
    Since China's accession to the WTO, we have repeatedly engaged 
China on the need for transparency in the operation of its trade 
regime, as China grapples with the fundamental changes required of it. 
And as we have witnessed how China has been implementing its new laws 
and regulations, we have urged China, for example, to use only science-
based SPS measures. We have also stressed the importance of regulating 
with technological neutrality, citing areas such as the wireless 3G 
field, and the need for a fairer approach in areas such as basic versus 
value-added telecom services and automobile industrial policy, among 
others. We are committed to pursuing these efforts for as long as these 
problems persist.
Enforcement of Trade Remedies Laws
    The rapid expansion of trade between our two countries has 
inevitably led in some cases to competition between our domestically 
produced goods and Chinese imports. When our industries face injurious 
trade with China, the Administration is fully committed to enforcing 
U.S. trade remedy laws and to exercising the important rights that the 
United States has under China's WTO accession agreement, including our 
ability to continue to apply special methodologies to China under the 
antidumping laws.
    China also agreed to two separate China-specific safeguard 
mechanisms to allow WTO members to cope with market disruptions caused 
by increasing economic integration with China. One such mechanism, the 
product-specific safeguard, was codified as Section 421 of the Trade 
Act of 1974, as amended, and is available until December 11, 2013. 
Since the implementation of Section 421, four petitions have been 
brought requesting import relief. In one case, the International Trade 
Commission found that our domestic producers' market had not been 
disrupted by imports from China. In two other cases, while the ITC 
found market disruption, the President determined that the adverse 
impact on the U.S. economy was clearly greater than the benefits from 
providing import relief. The fourth case is pending preliminary 
determination of market disruption by the ITC. While to date no import 
relief has been granted under Section 421, the President, in his most 
recent determination, reiterated his commitment to using the safeguard 
when the circumstances of a particular case warrant.
    The second safeguard agreed to by China as part of its WTO 
accession package is an additional mechanism specific to textiles, and 
allows WTO members under certain circumstances to invoke limited import 
relief--specifically a 7.5 percent cap on growth in imports of a given 
textile category for up to one year (6 percent for wool products)--
until December 31, 2008. The Administration is currently reviewing 
three requests under this safeguard mechanism, and initial 
determinations are scheduled for mid-November.
Broader Cooperation
    As China becomes more integrated into the global economy, it 
becomes more important for the United States and China to work together 
to promote our mutual interests. We have discussed various ways in 
which we can cooperate on international economic and trade issues, 
particularly given our largely complimentary economies, and we have 
generally received constructive responses from China. Of particular 
importance at this time are the Doha Development Agenda negotiations. 
We have had frank discussions with China on the progress of those 
negotiations and will continue to engage China in an effort to promote 
our common areas of interest. I note that China was a member of the G-
21 at the recent WTO Ministerial meetings in Cancun, Mexico. But, China 
also made some constructive interventions during those meetings, and as 
a member of APEC it has now agreed to build on the Cancun Ministerial 
text of September 13, 2003, which is a positive development.
Conclusion
    Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for providing 
me with the opportunity to testify. I look forward to your questions.
